1.10 Problems

27

interest formula, Equation (1).
(c) Determine the number of years and months that correspond to t.

The problem is solved by writing the following program in a script file:

% Solution of Sample Problem 1-4

P=5000;  r=0.085;  ta=17; n=12;

B=P*(1+r)^ta

Step (a): Calculate B from Eq. (2).

t=log(B/P)/(n*log(1+r/n))

Step (b): Solve Eq. (1)
for t, and calculate t.

years=fix(t)

Step (c): Determine the number of years.

months=ceil((t-years)*12)

Determine the number of months.

When the script file is executed, the following (the values of the variables B, t,
years, and months) is displayed in the Command Window:

>> format short g
B =
        20011

t =
       16.374

years =
    16

months =
     5

1.10 PROBLEMS

The  values  of  the  variables  B,  t,
years,  and  months  are  displayed
(since  a  semicolon  was  not  typed  at
the  end  of  any  of  the  commands  that
calculate the values).

The following problems can be solved by writing commands in the Command
Window or by writing a program in a script file and then executing the file.

1. Calculate:

(a)

2. Calculate:

(a)

(b)

(b)

28

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

3. Calculate:

(a)

4. Calculate:

(a)

5. Calculate:

(a)

(b)

(b)

(b)

6. Define the variable z as z = 4.5; then evaluate:

(a)

(b)

7. Define the variable t as t = 3.2; then evaluate:

(a)

(b)

8. Define the variables x and y as x = 6.5 and y = 3.8; then evaluate:

(a)

(b)

9. Define the variables a, b, c, and d as:

,

,

, and

; then evaluate:

(a)

(b)

10. Two trigonometric identities are given by:

(a)

(b)

For each part, verify that the identity is correct by calculating the values of
the left and right sides of the equation, substituting

.

11. Two trigonometric identities are given by:

(a)

       (b)

For each part, verify that the identity is correct by calculating the values of
the left and right sides of the equation, substituting

.

1.10 Problems

29

12. Define two variables:  alpha =  /8, and beta =  /6. Using these variables, show
that the following trigonometric identity is correct by calculating the values
of the left and right sides of the equation.

13. Given:

. Use MATLAB to calculate the

following definite integral:

.

14. A rectangular box has the dimensions shown.
(a) Determine  the  angle  BAC  to  the  nearest

A

degree.

(b) Determine the area of the triangle ABC to

the nearest tenth of a centimeter.

Law of cosines:
Heron’s formula for triangular area:

, where

B

23 cm

.

15. The arc length of a segment of a parabola ABC is

given by:

16 cm
C

43 cm

y

B

h

Determine LABC if a=8 in. and h=13 in.

A

a

a

C

x

16. The  three  shown  circles,  with  radius  15  in.,
10.5 in., and 4.5 in., are tangent to each other.
(a) Calculate  the  angle
  (in  degrees)  by

using the law of cosines.

(Law of cosines:
(b) Calculate  the  angles    and
using the law of sines.

)
  (in  degrees)

(c) Check that the sum of the angles is 180º.

17. A  frustum  of  cone  is  filled  with  ice  cream  such  that
the  portion  above  the  cone  is  a  hemisphere.  Define
the  variables  di=1.25  in.,  d0=2.25  in.,  h=2  in.,  and
determine the volume of the ice cream.

do

h

di

30

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

18. In  the  triangle  shown

  in.,

in.,  and

in. Define a, b, and c as variables, and then:

(a) Calculate the angles

,  , and   by substituting the

variables in the law of cosines.

(Law of cosines:
(b) Verify  the  law  of  tangents  by  substituting  the

)

results into the right and left sides of:

law of tangents:

19. For the triangle shown,
,

Define
(a) Calculate  the  triangle  sides  (Use  the  law  of

, and p, as variables, and then:

,

, and its perimeter is

 mm.

sines).

(b) Calculate the radius r of the circle inscribed in

the triangle using the formula:

where

.

20. The  distance  d  from  a  point  P

  to  the
line  that  passes  through  the  two  points  A
  and  B
  can  be  calculated  by
  where  r  is  the  distance  between  the
B,
by

points

given

and

A

 and S is the
area of the triangle defined by the three points cal-

A

culated by

 where

z

B

y

P

x

.  Determine  the  distance  of

 from the line that passes through point A

point P
. First define the variables xP, yP, zP, xA, yA, zA, xB,
and point B
yB, and zB, and then use the variable to calculate s1, s2, s3, and r. Finally cal-
culate S and d.

1.10 Problems

31

21. The perimeter of an ellipse can be approximated

by:

y

b

x

a

Calculate  the  perimeter  of  an  ellipse  with

in. and

in.

22. A total of 4217 eggs have to be packed in boxes that can hold 36 eggs each.
By  typing  one  line  (command)  in  the  Command  Window,  calculate  how
many  eggs  will  remain  unpacked  if  every  box  that  is  used  has  to  be  full.
(Hint: Use MATLAB built-in function fix.)

23. A total of 777 people have to be transported using buses that have 46 seats
and vans that have 12 seats. Calculate how many buses are needed if all the
buses have to be full, and how many seats will remain empty in the vans if
enough  vans  are  used  to  transport  all  the  people  that  did  not  fit  into  the
buses. (Hint: Use MATLAB built-in functions fix and ceil.)

24. Change the display to format  long  g. Assign the number 7E8/13 to a
variable, and then use the variable in a mathematical expression to calculate
the following by typing one command:
(a) Round the number to the nearest tenth.
(b) Round the number to the nearest million.

25. The  voltage  difference  Vab  between  points  a
and b in the Wheatstone bridge circuit is given
by:

where
the Vab if

  and
V,

, and

.  Calculate
,

,

.

26. The current in a series RCL circuit is given

+

V

a

R1

R4

R2

R3

b

L

C

R

V

. Calculate I for the circuit shown if the supply voltage is 80

Hz,

,

H, and

F.

by:

where
V,

32

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

27. The monthly payment M of a mortgage  P for  n years with a fixed annual

interest rate r can be calculated by the formula:

Determine the monthly payment of a 30-year $450,000 mortgage with inter-
).  Define  the  variables  P,  r,  and  n  and  then  use
est  rate  of  4.2%  (
them in the formula to calculate M.

28. The number of permutations
out repetition is given by:

 of taking r objects out of n objects with-

(a) Determine  how  many  six-letter  passwords  can  be  formed  from  the  26

letters in the English alphabet if a letter can only be used once.

(b) How  many  passwords  can  be  formed  if  the  digits  0,  1,  2,  ...,  9  can  be

used in addition to the letters.

29. The number of combinations

 of taking r objects out of n objects is given

by:

In  the  Powerball  lottery  game  the  player  chooses  five  numbers  from  1
through 59, and then the Powerball number from 1 through 35.
Determine how many combinations are possible by calculating
(Use the built-in function factorial.)

 .

30. The  equivalent  resistance  of  two  resistors
R1 and R2 connected in parallel is given by

.  The  equivalent  resistance  of

two resistors R1 and R2 connected in series
is  given  by
.  Determine  the
equivalent resistance of the four resistors in the circuit shown in the figure.

31. The output voltage Vout in the circuit shown is given

by (Millman’s theorem):

R1

R2 R3

V1

V2 V3

Vout

Calculate  Vout  given
,,

,,

V,

V,

V,

,.

1.10 Problems

33

32. Radioactive  decay  of  carbon-14  is  used  for  estimating  the  age  of  organic

 is the amount of material at

,
material. The decay is modeled with the exponential function
where t is time,
 is the amount
of  material  at  time  t,  and  k  is  a  constant.  Carbon-14  has  a  half-life  of
approximately  5,730  years.  A  sample  taken  from  the  ancient  footprints  of
Acahualinca in Nicaragua shows that 77.45% of the initial (
) carbon-
14 is present. Determine the estimated age of the footprint. Solve the prob-
lem by writing a program in a script file. The program first determines the
constant  k,  then  calculates  t  for
,  and  finally  rounds  the
answer to the nearest year.

,

33. The greatest common divisor is the largest positive integer that divides the
numbers without a remainder. For example, the greatest common divisor of
8 and 12 is 4. Use the MATLAB Help Window to find a MATLAB built-in
function that determines the greatest common divisor of two numbers. Then
use the function to show that the greatest common divisor of:
(a) 91 and 147 is 7.
(b) 555 and 962 is 37.

34. The amount of energy E (in joules) that is released by an earthquake is given

by:

where M is the magnitude of the earthquake on the Richter scale.
(a) Determine the energy that was released from the Anchorage earthquake

(1964, Alaska, USA), magnitude 9.2.

(b) The energy released in Lisbon earthquake (Portugal) in 1755 was one-
half  the  energy  released  in  the  Anchorage  earthquake.  Determine  the
magnitude of the earthquake in Lisbon on the Richter scale.

35. According to the Doppler effect of light, the perceived wavelength

 of   a

p

light source with a wavelength of

 is given by:

m/s)  and  v  is  the  speed  the
where  c  is  the  speed  of  light  (about
observer  moves  toward  the  light  source.  Calculate  the  speed  the  observer
has to move in order to see a red light as green. Green wavelength is 530 nm
and red wavelength is 630 nm.

36. Newton’s law of cooling gives the temperature T(t) of an object at time t in
,  and  Ts,  the  temperature  of  the  sur-

terms  of  T0,  its  temperature  at
roundings.

34

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

A police officer arrives at a crime scene in a hotel room at 9:18 PM, where
he finds a dead body. He immediately measures the body’s temperature and
finds  it  to  be  79.5ºF.  Exactly  one  hour  later  he  measures  the  temperature
again and finds it to be 78.0ºF. Determine the time of death, assuming that
victim  body  temperature  was  normal  (98.6ºF)  prior  to  death  and  that  the
room temperature was constant at 69ºF.

37. The velocity v and the falling distance d as a function of time of a skydiver

that experience the air resistance can be approximated by:

   and

kg/m is a constant, m is the skydiver mass,

m/s2 is the
where
acceleration  due  to  gravity,  and  t  is  the  time  in  seconds  since the  skydiver
s for a
starts falling. Determine the velocity and the falling distance at
95-kg skydiver

38. Use the Help Window to find a display format that displays the output as a
ratio of integers. For example, the number 3.125 will be displayed as 25/8.
Change the display to this format and execute the following operations:

(a)

(b)

39. Gosper’s approximation for factorials is given by:

Use the formula for calculating 19!. Compare the result with the true value
obtained with MATLAB’s built-in function factorial by calculating the
error (Error=(TrueVal-ApproxVal)/TrueVal).

40. According  to  Newton’s  law  of  universal  gravitation,  the  attraction  force

between two bodies is given by:

where m1 and m2 are the masses of the bodies, r is the distance between the
N-m2/kg2 is the universal gravitational constant.
bodies, and
Determine  how  many  times  the  attraction  force  between  the  sun  and  the
Earth is larger than the attraction force between the Earth and the moon.
m,  the  distance
The  distance  between  the  sun  and  Earth  is

between  the  moon  and  Earth  is

m,

kg,

kg, and

kg.

