Chapter 1
Starting with
MATLAB

This chapter begins by describing the characteristics and purpose of the differ-
ent windows in MATLAB. Next, the Command Window is introduced in detail.
The chapter shows how to use MATLAB for arithmetic operations with scalars
in much to the way that a calculator is used. This includes the use of elementary
math functions with scalars. The chapter then shows how to define scalar vari-
ables (the assignment operator) and how to use these variables in arithmetic cal-
culations. The last section in the chapter introduces script files. It shows how to
write, save, and execute simple MATLAB programs.

1.1  STARTING MATLAB, MATLAB WINDOWS

It is assumed that the software is installed on the computer, and that the user
can start the program. Once the program starts, the MATLAB desktop window
opens with the default layout, Figure 1-1. The layout has a Toolstrip at the top,
the Current Folder Toolbar below it, and four windows underneath. At the top
of the Toolstrip there are three tabs: HOME, PLOTS, and APPS. Clicking on
the tabs changes the icons in the Toolstrip. Commonly, MATLAB is used with
the  HOME  tab  selected.  The  associated  icons  are  used  for  executing  various
commands,  as  explained  later  in  this  chapter.  The  PLOTS  tab  can  be  used  to
create plots, as explained in Chapter 5 (Section 5.12), and the APPS tab can be
used for opening additional applications and Toolboxes of MATLAB.
The default layout
The default layout (Figure 1-1) consists of the following four windows that are
displayed under the Toolstrip: the Command Window (the larger window), the
Current  Folder  Window  (on  the top  left), the  Details  Window  and the  Work-
space  Window  (on  the  bottom  lest).  A  list of  several  MATLAB  windows  and
their purposes is given in Table 1-1.

Four of the windows—the Command Window, the Figure Window, the Edi-
tor Window, and the Help Window—are used extensively throughout the book

6

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

Figure 1-1: The default view of MATLAB desktop.

and are briefly described on the following pages. More detailed descriptions are
included in the chapters where they are used. The Command History Window,
Current Folder Window, and the Workspace Window are described in Sections
1.2, 1.8.4, and 4.1, respectively.

Command Window:  The Command Window is MATLAB’s main window and
opens when MATLAB is started. It is convenient to have the Command Win-
dow as the only visible window. This can be done either by closing all the other
windows, or by selecting Command Window Only in the menu that opens when
the Layout icon on the Toolstrip is selected. To close a window, click on the pull-
down  menu  at  the  top  right-hand  side  of  the  window  and  then  select  Close.
Working in the Command Window is described in detail in Section 1.2.

Table 1-1: MATLAB windows

Window

Purpose

Command Window

Figure Window

Editor Window

Main  window,  enters  variables,  runs
programs.

Contains  output  from  graphic  com-
mands.

Creates  and  debugs  script  and  func-
tion files.

Help Window

Provides help information.

Command History Win-
dow

Logs commands entered in the Com-
mand Window.

1.1 Starting MATLAB, MATLAB Windows

7

Table 1-1: MATLAB windows

Window

Purpose

Workspace Window

Provides information about the vari-
ables that are stored.

Current Folder Window

Shows the files in the current folder.

Figure Window:  The Figure Window opens automatically when graphics com-
mands are executed, and contains graphs created by these commands. An exam-
ple of a Figure Window is shown in Figure 1-2. A more detailed description of
this window is given in Chapter 5.

Figure 1-2: Example of a Figure Window.

Editor Window:  The Editor Window is used for writing and editing programs.
This window is opened by clicking on the New Script icon in the Toolstrip, or by
clicking on the New icon and then selecting Script from the menu that opens. An
example of an Editor Window is shown in Figure 1-3. More details on the Edi-
tor Window are given in Section 1.8.2, where it is used for writing script files,
and in Chapter 7, where it is used to write function files.
Help Window:  The Help Window contains help information. This window can
be opened from the Help icon in the Toolstrip of the Command Window or the
toolbar of any MATLAB window. The Help Window is interactive and can be
used to obtain information on any feature of MATLAB. Figure 1-4 shows an
open Help Window.

When  MATLAB  is  started  for  the  first  time,  the  screen  looks  like  that
shown in Figure 1-1. For most beginners it is probably more convenient to close

8

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

Figure 1-3: Example of an Editor Window.

Figure 1-4: The Help Window.

