# 1.2 Working in the Command Window

all  the  windows  except  the  Command  Window.  The  closed  windows  can  be
reopened by selecting them from the layout icon in the Toolstrip. The windows
shown in Figure 1-1 can be displayed by clicking on the layout icon and selecting
Default in the menu that opens. The various windows in Figure 1-1 are docked
to  the  desktop.  A  window  can  be  undocked  (become  a  separate,  independent
window) by dragging it out. An independent window can be redocked by click-
ing on the pull-down menu at the top right-hand side of the window and then
selecting Dock.

## Working in the Command Window

The Command Window is MATLAB’s main window and can be used for execut-
ing  commands,  opening  other  windows,  running  programs written  by  the  user,
and managing the software. An example of the Command Window, with several
simple commands that will be explained later in this chapter, is shown in Figure
1-5.

To  type  a  command  the  cursor  is  placed
next to the command prompt ( >> ).

*Figure 1-5: The Command Window.*

Notes for working in the Command Window:

• To type a command, the cursor must be placed next to the command prompt (

>> ).

• Once  a  command  is  typed  and  the  Enter  key  is  pressed,  the  command  is  exe-
cuted. However, only the last command is executed. Everything executed previ-
ously (that might be still displayed) is unchanged.

• Several  commands  can  be  typed  in  the  same  line.  This  is  done  by  typing  a
comma between the commands. When the Enter key is pressed, the commands
are executed in order from left to right.

•

It is not possible to go back to a previous line that is displayed in the Command


Window, make a correction, and then re-execute the command.

• A previously typed command can be recalled to the command prompt with the
 ). When the command is displayed at the command prompt, it
 ) can be

up-arrow key (
can be modified if needed and then executed. The down-arrow key (
used to move down the list of previously typed commands.

•

If a command is too long to fit in one line, it can be continued to the next line by
typing three periods  … (called an ellipsis) and pressing the Enter key. The con-
tinuation of the command is then typed in the new line. The command can con-
tinue line after line up to a total of 4,096 characters.

The semicolon ( ; ):
When  a  command  is  typed  in  the  Command  Window  and  the  Enter  key  is
pressed, the command is executed. Any output that the command generates is
displayed in the Command Window. If a semicolon ( ; ) is typed at the end of a
command, the output of the command is not displayed. Typing a semicolon is
useful when the result is obvious or known, or when the output is very large.

If several commands are typed in the same line, the output from any of the
commands  will  not  be  displayed  if  a  semicolon  instead  of  a  comma  is  typed
between the commands.
Typing  %:
When the symbol % (percent) is typed at the beginning of a line, the line is desig-
nated as a comment. This means that when the Enter key is pressed the line is
not  executed.  The  %  character  followed  by  text  (comment)  can  also  be  typed
after a command (in the same line). This has no effect on the execution of the
command.

Usually  there  is  no  need  for  comments  in  the  Command  Window.  Com-
ments,  however,  are  frequently  used  in  a  program  to  add  descriptions  or  to
explain the program (see Chapters 4 and 6).
The clc command:
The clc command (type clc and press Enter) clears the Command Window.
After typing in the Command Window for a while, the display may become very
long.  Once  the  clc  command  is  executed,  a  clear  window  is  displayed.  The
command does not change anything that was done before. For example, if some
variables  were  defined  previously  (see  Section  1.6),  they  still  exist  and  can  be
used. The up-arrow key can also be used to recall commands that were typed
before.
The Command History Window:
The Command History Window lists the commands that have been entered in
the  Command  Window.  This  includes  commands  from  previous  sessions.  A
command  in  the  Command  History  Window  can  be  used  again  in  the  Com-
mand Window. By double-clicking on the command, the command is reentered
in the Command Window and executed. It is also possible to drag the command
to the Command Window, make changes if needed, and then execute it. The list

