14

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

1.5 ELEMENTARY MATH BUILT-IN FUNCTIONS

In addition to basic arithmetic operations, expressions in MATLAB can include
functions. MATLAB has a very large library of built-in functions. A function
has a name and an argument in parentheses. For example, the function that cal-
culates  the  square  root  of  a  number  is  sqrt(x).  Its  name  is  sqrt,  and  the
argument is x. When the function is used, the argument can be a number, a vari-
able  that  has  been  assigned  a  numerical  value  (explained  in  Section  1.6),  or  a
computable expression that can be made up of numbers and/or variables. Func-
tions can also be included in arguments, as well as in expressions. Tutorial 1-2
shows  examples  of  using  the  function  sqrt(x)  when  MATLAB  is  used  as  a
calculator with scalars.

Tutorial 1-2: Using the sqrt built-in function.

>> sqrt(64)

ans =
     8

>> sqrt(50+14*3)

ans =
    9.5917

Argument is a number.

Argument is an expression.

>> sqrt(54+9*sqrt(100))

Argument includes a function.

ans =
    12

>> (15+600/4)/sqrt(121)

Function is included in an expression.

ans =
    15
>>

Some  commonly  used  elementary  MATLAB  mathematical  built-in  func-
tions are given in Tables 1-3 through 1-5. A complete list of functions organized
by category can be found in the Help Window.

Table 1-3: Elementary math functions

Function

sqrt(x)

Description

Square root.

Example

>> sqrt(81)
ans =
     9

nthroot(x,n)

Real nth root of a real number
x. (If x is negative n must be an
odd integer.)

>> nthroot(80,5)
ans =
    2.4022

exp(x)

Exponential

ex

.

>> exp(5)
ans =
  148.4132

1.5 Elementary Math Built-in Functions

15

Table 1-3: Elementary math functions (Continued)

Function

abs(x)

log(x)

Description

Absolute value.

Natural logarithm.
Base e logarithm (ln).

log10(x)

Base 10 logarithm.

factorial(x)

The factorial function x!
(x must be a positive integer.)

Example

>> abs(-24)
ans =
    24

>> log(1000)
ans =
    6.9078

>> log10(1000)
ans =
    3.0000

>> factorial(5)
ans =
   120

Table 1-4: Trigonometric math functions

Function

sin(x)
sind(x)

Description

Sine of angle x (x in radians).
Sine of angle x (x in degrees).

cos(x)
cosd(x)

Cosine of angle x (x in radians).
Cosine of angle x (x in degrees).

tan(x)
tand(x)

Tangent  of  angle  x  (x  in  radians).
Tangent of angle x (x in degrees).

cot(x)
cotd(x)

Cotangent of angle x (x in radians).
Cotangent of angle x (x in degrees).

Example

>> sin(pi/6)
ans =
    0.5000

>> cosd(30)
ans =
    0.8660

>> tan(pi/6)
ans =
    0.5774

>> cotd(30)
ans =
    1.7321

The  inverse  trigonometric  functions  are  asin(x),  acos(x),  atan(x),
acot(x)  for  the  angle  in  radians;  and  asind(x),  acosd(x),  atand(x),
acotd(x) for the angle in degrees. The hyperbolic trigonometric functions are
sinh(x),  cosh(x),  tanh(x),  and  coth(x).  Table  1-4  uses  pi,  which  is
equal to

 (see Section 1.6.3).

Table 1-5: Rounding functions

Function

round(x)

Description

Round to the nearest integer.

Example

>> round(17/5)
ans =
     3

