1.7 Useful Commands for Managing Variables

19

1.6.3 Predefined Variables and Keywords

There are 20 words, called keywords, that are reserved by MATLAB for various
purposes and cannot be used as variable names. These words are:

break  case  catch  classdef  continue  else  elseif  end  for
function  global  if  otherwise  parfor  persistent  return
spmd switch try while

When  typed,  these  words  appear  in  blue.  An  error  message  is  displayed  if  the
user tries to use a keyword as a variable name. (The keywords can be displayed
by typing the command iskeyword.)

A number of frequently used variables are already defined when MATLAB

is started. Some of the predefined variables are:

ans A variable that has the value of the last expression that was not assigned
to  a  specific  variable  (see  Tutorial  1-1).  If  the  user  does  not  assign  the
value  of  an  expression  to a variable,  MATLAB  automatically  stores  the
result in ans.
pi  The number  .
eps The smallest difference between two numbers. Equal to 2^(–52), which is

approximately 2.2204e–016.

inf Used for infinity.

Defined as
Same as i.

i
j
NaN Stands  for  Not-a-Number.  Used  when  MATLAB  cannot  determine  a

, which is: 0 + 1.0000i.

valid numeric value. Example: 0/0.

The predefined variables can be redefined to have any other value. The vari-
ables pi, eps, and inf, are usually not redefined since they are frequently used
in many applications. Other predefined variables, such as  i and j, are sometime
redefined (commonly in association with loops) when complex numbers are not
involved in the application.

1.7 USEFUL COMMANDS FOR MANAGING VARIABLES

The following are commands that can be used to eliminate variables or to obtain
information about variables that have been created. When these commands are
typed in the Command Window and the Enter key is pressed, either they pro-
vide information, or they perform a task as specified below.

Command

clear

Outcome

Removes all variables from the memory.

