16

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

Table 1-5: Rounding functions (Continued)

Function

fix(x)

Description

Round toward zero.

ceil(x)

Round toward infinity.

floor(x)

Round toward minus infinity.

rem(x,y)

sign(x)

Returns  the  remainder  after  x
is divided by y.

Signum  function.  Returns  1  if
,  and  0  if
x
x
x

0>
0=

,  –1  if

0<

.

Example

>> fix(13/5)
ans =
     2

>> ceil(11/5)
ans =
     3

>> floor(-9/4)
ans =
    -3

>> rem(13,5)
ans =
     3

>> sign(5)
ans =
     1

1.6 DEFINING SCALAR VARIABLES

A variable is a name made of a letter or a combination of several letters (and
digits) that is assigned a numerical value. Once a variable is assigned a numerical
value, it can be used in mathematical expressions, in functions, and in any MAT-
LAB  statements  and  commands.  A  variable  is  actually  a  name  of  a  memory
location.  When  a  new  variable  is  defined,  MATLAB  allocates  an  appropriate
memory  space  where  the  variable’s  assignment  is  stored.  When  the  variable  is
used the stored data is used. If the variable is assigned a new value the content of
the    memory location is replaced. (In Chapter 1 we consider only variables that
are  assigned  numerical  values  that  are  scalars.  Assigning  and  addressing  vari-
ables that are arrays is discussed in Chapter 2.)

1.6.1 The Assignment Operator

In  MATLAB  the    =    sign  is  called  the  assignment  operator.  The  assignment
operator assigns a value to a variable.

Variable_name = A numerical value, or a computable expression

• The  left-hand  side  of  the  assignment  operator  can  include  only  one  variable
name. The right-hand side can be a number, or a computable expression that can
include numbers and/or variables that were previously assigned numerical val-
ues. When the Enter key is pressed the numerical value of the right-hand side is
assigned  to  the  variable,  and  MATLAB  displays  the  variable  and  its  assigned
value in the next two lines.

1.6 Defining Scalar Variables

17

The following shows how the assignment operator works.

>> x=15

x =
    15

>> x=3*x-12

x =
    33
>>

The number 15 is assigned to the variable x.

MATLAB  displays  the  variable
name and its assigned value.

A  new  value  is  assigned  to  x.
The new value is 3 times the pre-
vious value of x minus 12.

The last statement (
) illustrates the difference between the assignment
operator  and  the  equal  sign.  If  in  this  statement  the  =  sign  meant  equal,  the
value of x would be 6 (solving the equation for x).

The use of previously defined variables to define a new variable is demon-

strated next.

>> a=12

a =
    12

>> B=4

B =
     4

Assign 12 to a.

Assign 4 to B.

>> C=(a-B)+40-a/B*10

C =
    18

Assign the value of the
expression on the right-hand
side to the variable C.

•

•

If a semicolon is typed at the end of the command, then when the Enter key is
pressed,  MATLAB  does  not  display  the  variable  with  its  assigned  value  (the
variable still exists and is stored in memory).

If a variable already exists, typing the variable’s name and pressing the Enter key
will display the variable and its value in the next two lines.

As an example, the last demonstration is repeated below using semicolons.

>> a=12;

>> B=4;

>> C=(a-B)+40-a/B*10;

The variables a, B, and C are defined but
are  not  displayed,  since  a  semicolon  is
typed at the end of each statement.

>> C
C =
    18

The value of the variable C is displayed
by typing the name of the variable.

• Several assignments can be typed in the same line. The assignments must be sep-
arated with a comma (spaces can be added after the comma). When the Enter
key is pressed, the assignments are executed from left to right and the variables

18

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

and their assignments are displayed. A variable is not displayed if a semicolon is
typed instead of a comma. For example, the assignments of the variables a, B,
and C above can all be done in the same line.

>> a=12, B=4; C=(a-B)+40-a/B*10

a =
    12

C =
    18

The variable B is not displayed because a semi-
colon is typed at the end of the assignment.

• A variable that already exists can be reassigned a new value. For example:

>> ABB=72;

>> ABB=9;

>> ABB

ABB =
     9
>>

A value of 72 is assigned to the variable ABB.

A new value of 9 is assigned to the variable ABB.

The  current  value  of  the  variable  is  dis-
played  when  the  name  of  the  variable  is
typed and the Enter key is pressed.

• Once a variable is defined it can be used as an argument in functions. For exam-

ple:

>> x=0.75;

>> E=sin(x)^2+cos(x)^2
E =
     1
>>

1.6.2 Rules About Variable Names

A variable can be named according to the following rules:
• Must begin with a letter.

• Can be up to 63 characters long.

• Can contain letters, digits, and the underscore character.

• Cannot contain punctuation characters (e.g., period, comma, semicolon).

• MATLAB  is  case-sensitive:  it  distinguishes  between  uppercase  and  lowercase
letters. For example, AA, Aa, aA, and aa are the names of four different vari-
ables.

• No spaces are allowed between characters (use the underscore where a space is

desired).

• Avoid using the name of a built-in function for a variable (i.e., avoid using cos,
sin, exp, sqrt, etc.). Once a function name is used to for a variable name, the
function cannot be used.

