1.8 Script Files

21

value to a variable without a semicolon at the end), the output is displayed in the
Command Window.

• Using a script file is convenient because it can be edited (corrected or otherwise

changed) and executed many times.

• Script files can be typed and edited in any text editor and then pasted into the

MATLAB editor.

• Script files are also called M-files because the extension .m is used when they are

saved.

1.8.2 Creating and Saving a Script File

In MATLAB script files are created and edited in the Editor/Debugger Window.
This  window  is  opened  from  the  Command  Window  by  clicking  on  the  New
Script icon in the Toolstrip, or by clicking New in the Toolstrip and then select-
ing  Script  from  the  menu  that  open.  An  open  Editor/Debugger  Window  is
shown in Figure 1-6.

Line
number

The  commands  in  the  script  file  are
typed line by line. The lines are num-
bered automatically. A new line starts
when the Enter key is pressed.

Figure 1-6: The Editor/Debugger Window.

The  Editor/Debugger  Window  has  a  Toolstrip  at  the  top  and  three  tabs
EDITOR,  PUBLISH,  and  VIEW  above  it.  Clicking  on  the  tabs  changes  the
icons  in  the  Toolstrip.  Commonly,  MATLAB  is  used  with  the  HOME  tab
selected.  The  associated  icons  are  used  for  executing  various  commands,  as
explained later in the Chapter. Once the window is open, the commands of the
script  file  are  typed  line  by  line.  MATLAB  automatically  numbers  a  new  line
every time the Enter key is pressed. The commands can also be typed in any text
editor  or  word  processor  program  and  then  copied  and  pasted  in  the  Editor/
Debugger Window. An example of a short program typed in the Editor/Debug-
ger Window is shown in Figure 1-7. The first few lines in a script file are typi-
cally comments (which are not executed, since the first character in the line is %)

