20

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

Command

clear x y z

who

whos

Outcome

Removes  only  variables  x,  y,  and  z  from  the
memory.

Displays a list of the variables currently in the
memory.

Displays a list of the variables currently in the
memory and their sizes together with informa-
tion  about  their  bytes  and  class  (see  Section
4.1).

1.8 SCRIPT FILES

So far all the commands were typed in the Command Window and were exe-
cuted when the Enter key was pressed. Although every MATLAB command can
be executed in this way, using the Command Window to execute a series of com-
mands—especially if they are related to each other (a program)—is not conve-
nient and may be difficult or even impossible. The commands in the Command
Window cannot be saved and executed again. In addition, the Command Win-
dow is not interactive. This means that every time the Enter key is pressed only
the last command is executed, and everything executed before is unchanged. If a
change  or  a  correction  is  needed  in  a  command  that  was  previously  executed
and the result of this command is used in commands that follow, all the com-
mands have to be entered and executed again.

A different (better) way of executing commands with MATLAB is first to
create a file with a list of commands (program), save it, and then run (execute)
the file. When the file runs, the commands it contains are executed in the order
that  they  are  listed.  If  needed,  the  commands  in  the  file  can  be  corrected  or
changed and the file can be saved and run again. Files that are used for this pur-
pose are called script files.

IMPORTANT  NOTE:  This  section  covers  only  the  minimum  required  in
order to run simple programs. This will allow the student to use script files when
practicing the material that is presented in this and the next two chapters (instead
of typing repeatedly in the Command Window). Script files are considered again in
Chapter  4,  where  many  additional  topics  that  are  essential  for  understanding
MATLAB and writing programs in script file are covered.

1.8.1 Notes About Script Files

• A script file is a sequence of MATLAB commands, also called a program.

• When a script file runs (is executed), MATLAB executes the commands in the
order they are written, just as if they were typed in the Command Window.

• When a script file has a command that generates an output (e.g., assignment of a

1.8 Script Files

21

value to a variable without a semicolon at the end), the output is displayed in the
Command Window.

• Using a script file is convenient because it can be edited (corrected or otherwise

changed) and executed many times.

• Script files can be typed and edited in any text editor and then pasted into the

MATLAB editor.

• Script files are also called M-files because the extension .m is used when they are

saved.

1.8.2 Creating and Saving a Script File

In MATLAB script files are created and edited in the Editor/Debugger Window.
This  window  is  opened  from  the  Command  Window  by  clicking  on  the  New
Script icon in the Toolstrip, or by clicking New in the Toolstrip and then select-
ing  Script  from  the  menu  that  open.  An  open  Editor/Debugger  Window  is
shown in Figure 1-6.

Line
number

The  commands  in  the  script  file  are
typed line by line. The lines are num-
bered automatically. A new line starts
when the Enter key is pressed.

Figure 1-6: The Editor/Debugger Window.

The  Editor/Debugger  Window  has  a  Toolstrip  at  the  top  and  three  tabs
EDITOR,  PUBLISH,  and  VIEW  above  it.  Clicking  on  the  tabs  changes  the
icons  in  the  Toolstrip.  Commonly,  MATLAB  is  used  with  the  HOME  tab
selected.  The  associated  icons  are  used  for  executing  various  commands,  as
explained later in the Chapter. Once the window is open, the commands of the
script  file  are  typed  line  by  line.  MATLAB  automatically  numbers  a  new  line
every time the Enter key is pressed. The commands can also be typed in any text
editor  or  word  processor  program  and  then  copied  and  pasted  in  the  Editor/
Debugger Window. An example of a short program typed in the Editor/Debug-
ger Window is shown in Figure 1-7. The first few lines in a script file are typi-
cally comments (which are not executed, since the first character in the line is %)

22

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

that describe the program written in the script file.

Define  three
variables.

The Run icon.

Comments.

Calculating the two roots.

Figure 1-7: A program typed in the Editor/Debugger Window.

Before a script file can be executed it has to be saved. This is done by click-
ing  Save  in  the  Toolstrip  and  selecting  Save  As...  from  the  menu  that  opens.
When saved, MATLAB adds the extension .m to the name. The rules for nam-
ing a script file follow the rules of naming a variable (must begin with a letter,
can include digits and underscore, no spaces, and up to 63 characters long). The
names of user-defined variables, predefined variables, and MATLAB commands
or functions should not be used as names of script files.

1.8.3 Running (Executing) a Script File

A script file can be executed either directly from the Editor Window by clicking
on  the  Run  icon  (see  Figure  1-7)  or  by  typing  the  file  name  in  the  Command
Window and then pressing the Enter key. For a file to be executed, MATLAB
needs to know where the file is saved. The file will be executed if the folder where
the file is saved is the current folder of MATLAB or if the folder is listed in the
search path, as explained next.

1.8.4 Current Folder

The current folder is shown in the “Current Folder” field in the desktop toolbar
of the Command Window, as shown in Figure 1-8. If an attempt is made to exe-
cute a script file by clicking on the Run icon (in the Editor Window) when the
current  folder  is  not  the  folder  where  the  script  file  is  saved,  then  the  prompt
shown in Figure 1-9 opens. The user can then change the current folder to the
folder where the script file is saved,  or add it to the search path. Once two or
more different current folders are used in a session, it is possible to switch from
one to another in the Current Folder field in the Command Window. The cur-

1.8 Script Files

23

The current folder is shown here.

Figure 1-8: The Current folder field in the Command Window.

Figure 1-9: Changing the current directory.

rent folder can also be changed in the Current Folder Window, shown in Figure
1-10, which can be opened from the Desktop menu. The Current Folder can be
changed by choosing the drive and folder where the file is saved.

Click here to
browse  for  a
folder.

Click here to
go  up  one
level  in  the
file system.

Current  folder
shown here.

Click  here  to
the
change
folder.

Figure 1-10: The Current Folder Window.

