24

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

An alternative simple way to change the current folder is to use the cd com-
mand  in  the  Command  Window.  To  change  the  current  folder  to  a  different
drive, type cd, space, and then the name of the directory followed by a colon :
and  press  the  Enter  key.  For  example,  to  change  the  current  folder  to  drive  E
(e.g., the flash drive) type cd  E:. If the script file is saved in a folder within a
drive, the path to that folder has to be specified. This is done by typing the path
as a string in the cd command. For example, cd('E:\Chapter 1') sets the
path to the folder Chapter 1 in drive F. The following example shows how the
current  folder  is  changed  to  be  drive  E.  Then  the  script  file  from  Figure  1-7,
which  was  saved  in  drive  E  as  ProgramExample.m,  is  executed  by  typing  the
name of the file and pressing the Enter key.

>> cd('E:\Chapter 1')

The current directory is changed to drive E.

>> Chap1_Examp1

x1 =
    3.5000
x2 =
   -1.2500

The  script  file  is  executed  by  typing  the
name of the file and pressing the Enter key.

The output generated by the script file (the roots x1
and x2) is displayed in the Command Window.

1.9 EXAMPLES OF MATLAB APPLICATIONS

Sample Problem 1-1: Trigonometric identity

A trigonometric identity is given by:

cos2

x
---
2

=

x
xsin+
tan
-------------------------------
x
tan
2

Verify that the identity is correct by calculating each side of the equation, substi-

tuting

x

---=
5

.

Solution

The problem is solved by typing the following commands in the Command Win-
dow.

>> x=pi/5;

>> LHS=cos(x/2)^2

LHS =
    0.9045

Define x.

Calculate the left-hand side.

>> RHS=(tan(x)+sin(x))/(2*tan(x))

Calculate the right-hand side.

RHS =
    0.9045

1.9 Examples of MATLAB Applications

25

Sample Problem 1-2: Geometry and trigonometry

Four circles are placed as shown in the figure.
At each point where two circles are in contact,
they are tangent to each other. Determine the
distance between the centers C2 and C4.
The radii of the circles are:
mm,

mm,  and

mm,
mm.

C2

C1

C3

C4

Solution

The  lines  that  connect  the  centers  of  the  circles
create four triangles. In two of the triangles,  C1C2C3
and  C1C3C4,  the  lengths  of  all  the  sides  are  known.
This information is used to calculate the angles  1 and
2  in  these  triangles  by  using  the  law  of  cosines.  For
example,  1 is calculated from:

Next,  the  length  of  the  side  C2C4  is  calculated  by
considering  the  triangle  C1C2C4.  This  is  done,  again,  by  using  the  law  of
cosines (the lengths C1C2 and C1C4 are known and the angle  3 is the sum of the
angles  1 and  2).

The problem is solved by writing the following program in a script file:

% Solution of Sample Problem 1-2

R1=16; R2=6.5; R3=12; R4=9.5;

C1C2=R1+R2; C1C3=R1+R3; C1C4=R1+R4;

C2C3=R2+R3; C3C4=R3+R4;

Define the R’s.

Calculate the lengths
of the sides.

Gama1=acos((C1C2^2+C1C3^2-C2C3^2)/(2*C1C2*C1C3));

Gama2=acos((C1C3^2+C1C4^2-C3C4^2)/(2*C1C3*C1C4));

Gama3=Gama1+Gama2;

Calculate  1,  2, and  3.

C2C4=sqrt(C1C2^2+C1C4^2-2*C1C2*C1C4*cos(Gama3))

When the script file is executed, the following (the value of the variable C2C4) is
displayed in the Command Window:

Calculate the length of side C2C4.

C2C4 =
   33.5051

26

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

Sample Problem 1-3: Heat transfer

An object with an initial temperature of
chamber that has a constant temperature of
change according to the equation

 that is placed at time t = 0 inside a
 will experience a temperature

where T is the temperature of the object at time t, and k is a constant. A soda
can  at  a  temperature  of  120°  F  (after  being  left  in  the  car)  is  placed  inside  a
refrigerator where the temperature is 38° F. Determine, to the nearest degree, the
temperature of the can after three hours. Assume k = 0.45. First define all of the
variables and then calculate the temperature using one MATLAB command.

Solution

The problem is solved by typing the following commands in the Command Win-
dow.

>> Ts=38;  T0=120; k=0.45; t=3;

>> T=round(Ts+(T0-Ts)*exp(-k*t))

T =
    59

Round to the nearest integer.

Sample Problem 1-4: Compounded interest

The balance B of a savings account after t years when a principal P is invested at
an annual interest rate r and the interest is compounded n times a year is given
by:

If the interest is compounded yearly, the balance is given by:

       (1)

       (2)

Suppose $5,000 is invested for 17 years in one account for which the interest is
compounded yearly. In addition, $5,000 is invested in a second account in which
the interest is compounded monthly. In both accounts the interest rate is 8.5%.
Use MATLAB to determine how long (in years and months) it would take for
the  balance  in  the  second  account  to  be  the  same  as  the  balance  of  the  first
account after 17 years.

Solution

Follow these steps:
(a) Calculate  B  for  $5,000  invested  in  a  yearly  compounded  interest  account
after 17 years using Equation (2).
(b) Calculate t for the B calculated in part (a), from the monthly compounded

