11.1 Symbolic Objects and Symbolic Expressions

353

>> syms x y

>> SA=x+y, SB=x-y

Define x and y as symbolic variables.
Create two symbolic expressions SA and SB.

SA =
x+y
SB =
x-y

SA

y+=
x

>> F=SA^2/SB^3+x^2

Create a new symbolic expression F using SA and SB.

F =
(x+y)^2/(x-y)^3+x^2

11.1.3 The findsym Command and the Default Symbolic Variable

The findsym command can be used to find which symbolic variables are pres-
ent in an existing symbolic expression. The format of the command is:

findsym(S)

or

findsym(S,n)

The  findsym(S)  command  displays  the  names  of  all  the  symbolic  variables
(separated by commas) that are in the expression S in alphabetical order. The
findsym(S,n) command displays n symbolic variables that are in expression
S in the default order. For one-letter symbolic variables, the default order starts
with x, and followed by letters, according to their closeness to x. If there are two
letters equally close to x, the letter that is after x in alphabetical order is first (y
before w, and z before v). The default symbolic variable in a symbolic expression
is  the  first  variable  in  the  default  order.  The  default  symbolic  variable  in  an
expression S can be identified by typing findsym(S,1). Examples:

>> syms x h w y d t

>> S=h*x^2+d*y^2+t*w^2

S =
t*w^2 + h*x^2 + d*y^2

>> findsym(S)

Define x, h, w, y, d, and t as symbolic variables.
Create a symbolic expression S.

Use the findsym(S) command.

ans =
d, h, t, w, x, y

The symbolic variables are displayed in alphabetical order.

>> findsym(S,5)

Use the findsym(S,n) command (n = 5).

ans =
x,y,w,t,h

Five symbolic variables are displayed in the default order.

>> findsym(S,1)

Use the findsym(S,n) command with n = 1.

ans =
x

The default symbolic variable is displayed.

