350

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

>> e=13

e =
    13

13 is assigned to e (numerical variable).

The  display  of  the  value  of  a
numerical variable is indented.

Several  symbolic  variables  can  be  created  in  one  command  by  using  the

syms command, which has the form:

syms variable_name variable_name variable_name

The command creates symbolic objects that have the same names as the sym-
bolic variables. For example, the variables y, z, and d can all be created as sym-
bolic variables in one command by typing:

>> syms y z d

>> y
y =
y

The variables created by the syms command are
not displayed automatically. Typing the name of
the variable shows that the variable was created.

When the syms command is executed, the variables it creates are not displayed
automatically—even if a semicolon is not typed at the end of the command.

11.1.2 Creating Symbolic Expressions

Symbolic expressions are mathematical expressions written in terms of symbolic
variables.  Once  symbolic  variables  are  created,  they  can  be  used  for  creating
symbolic expressions. The symbolic expression is a symbolic object (the display
is not indented). The form for creating a symbolic expression is:

Expression_name = Mathematical expression

A few examples are:

>> syms a b c x y

Define a, b, c, x, and y as symbolic variables.

>> f=a*x^2+b*x + c

f =
a*x^2 + b*x + c

Create the symbolic expression
ax2
 and assign it to f.

bx

+

+

c

The display of the symbolic expression is not indented.

When a symbolic expression, which includes mathematical operations that can
be  executed  (addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  and  division),  is  entered,
MATLAB executes the operations as the expression is created. For example:

>> g=2*a/3+4*a/7-6.5*x+x/3+4*5/3-1.5

is entered.

11.1 Symbolic Objects and Symbolic Expressions

351

g =
(26*a)/21 - (37*x)/6 + 31/6

 is displayed.

Notice  that  all  the  calculations  are  carried  out  exactly,  with  no  numerical

approximation. In the last example,

 and

 were added by MATLAB to

give

,  and

  was  added  to

.  The  operations  with  the  terms

that contain only numbers in the symbolic expression are carried out exactly. In

the last example,

 is replaced by

.

The difference between exact and approximate calculations is demonstrated
in the following example, where the same mathematical operations are carried
out—once with symbolic variables and once with numerical variables.

>> a=sym(3); b=sym(5);

>> e=b/a+sqrt(2)

Define a and b as symbolic 3 and 5, respectively.
Create an expression that includes a and b.

e =
2^(1/2) + 5/3

>> c=3; d=5;

>> f=d/c+sqrt(2)

f =
    3.0809

An  exact  value  of  e  is  displayed  as  a  sym-
bolic object (the display is not indented).
Define c and d as numerical 3 and 5, respectively.
Create an expression that includes c and d.

An approximated value of f is displayed
as a number (the display is indented).

An expression that is created can include both symbolic objects and numer-
ical variables. However, if an expression includes a symbolic object (or several),
all the mathematical operations will be carried out exactly. For example, if c is
replaced by a in the last expression, the result is exact, as it was in the first exam-
ple.

>> g=d/a+sqrt(2)

g =
2^(1/2) + 5/3

Additional facts about symbolic expressions and symbolic objects:

• Symbolic expressions can include numerical variables that have been obtained
from the execution of numerical expressions. When these variables are inserted
in  symbolic  expressions  their  exact  value  is  used,  even  if  the  variable  was  dis-
played before with an approximated value. For example:

>> h=10/3

h =
    3.3333

h is defined to be 10/3 (a numerical variable).

An approximated value of h (numerical variable) is displayed.

352

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

>> k=sym(5); m=sym(7);

Define k and m as symbolic 5 and 7, respectively.

>> p=k/m+h

p =
85/21

h, k, and m are used in an expression.

The exact value of h is used in the determination of p.
An exact value of p (symbolic object) is displayed.

• The  double(S)  command  can  be  used  to  convert  a  symbolic  expression
(object) S that is written in an exact form to numerical form. (The name “dou-
ble” comes from the fact that the command returns a double-precision floating-
point number representing the value of S.) Two examples are shown. In the first,
the p from the last example is converted into numerical form. In the second, a
symbolic object is created and then converted into numerical form.

>> pN=double(p)

pN =
    4.0476

p is converted to numerical form (assigned to pN).

>> y=sym(10)*cos(5*pi/6)

Create a symbolic expression y.

y =
-5*3^(1/2)

>> yN=double(y)

yN =
   -8.6603

Exact value of y is displayed.

y is converted to numerical form (assigned to yN).

• A symbolic object that is created can also be a symbolic expression written in
terms of variables that were not first created as symbolic objects. For example,
the  quadratic  expression
  can  be  created  as  a  symbolic  object
c
+
named f by using the sym command:

ax2

bx

+

>> f=sym('a*x^2+b*x+c')

f =
a*x^2 + b*x +c

It  is  important  to  understand  that  in  this  case,  the  variables  a,  b,  c,  and  x
included in the object do not exist individually as independent symbolic objects
(the whole expression is one object). This means that it is impossible to perform
symbolic math operations associated with the individual variables in the object.
For example, it will not be possible to differentiate f with respect to x. This is
different from the way in which the quadratic expression was created in the first
example in this section, where the individual variables are first created as sym-
bolic objects and then used in the quadratic expression.

• Existing symbolic expressions can be used to create new symbolic expressions.
This  is  done  by  simply  using  the  name  of  the  existing  expression  in  the  new
expression. For example:

