348

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

can  also  be  used  as  separate  independent  software.  That  software  uses  the
MuPAD  language,  which  has  a  completely  different  structure  and  commands
than MATLAB. The Symbolic Math Toolbox is included in the student version
of MATLAB. In the standard version, the toolbox is purchased separately. To
check  if  the  Symbolic  Math  Toolbox  is  installed  on  a  computer,  the  user  can
type the command ver in the Command Window. In response, MATLAB dis-
plays information about the version that is used as well as a list of the toolboxes
that are installed.

The  starting  point  for  symbolic  operations  is  symbolic  objects.  Symbolic
objects  are  made  of  variables  and  numbers  that,  when  used  in  mathematical
expressions, tell MATLAB to execute the expression symbolically. Typically, the
user first defines (creates) the symbolic variables (objects) that are needed, and
then  uses  them  to  create  symbolic  expressions  that  are  subsequently  used  in
symbolic operations. If needed, symbolic expressions can be used in numerical
operations

The  first  section  in  this  chapter  describes  how  to  define  symbolic  objects
and how to use them to create symbolic expressions. The second section shows
how to change the form of existing expressions. Once a symbolic expression has
been created, it can be used in mathematical operations. MATLAB has a large
selection  of  functions  for  this  purpose.  The  next  four  sections  (11.3–11.6)
describe how to use MATLAB to solve algebraic equations, to carry out differ-
entiation and integration, and to solve differential equations. Section 11.7 cov-
ers  plotting  symbolic  expressions.  How  to  use  symbolic  expressions  in
subsequent numerical calculations is explained in the following section.

11.1 SYMBOLIC OBJECTS AND SYMBOLIC EXPRESSIONS

A symbolic object can be a variable (without a preassigned numerical value), a
number, or an expression made of symbolic variables and numbers. A symbolic
expression  is  a  mathematical  expression  containing  one  or  more  symbolic
objects. When typed, a symbolic expression may look like a standard numerical
expression. However, because the expression contains symbolic objects, it is exe-
cuted by MATLAB symbolically.

11.1.1 Creating Symbolic Objects

Symbolic objects can be variables or numbers. They can be created with the sym
and/or syms commands. A single symbolic object can be created with the sym
command:

object_name = sym(‘string’)

where the string, which is the symbolic object, is assigned to a name. The string
can be:
• A single letter or a combination of several letters (no spaces). Examples: ‘a’,

‘x’, ‘yad’.

11.1 Symbolic Objects and Symbolic Expressions

349

• A  combination  of  letters  and  digits  starting  with  a  letter  and  with  no  spaces

Examples: ‘xh12’,‘r2d2’.

• A number. Examples: ‘15’, ‘4’.

In the first two cases (where the string is a single letter, a combination of several
letters, or a combination of letters and digits), the symbolic object is a symbolic
variable. In this case it is convenient (but not necessary) to give the object the
same name as the string. For example, a, bb, and x, can be defined as symbolic
variables as follows:

>> a=sym('a')

Create a symbolic object a and assign it to a.

a =
a

>> bb=sym('bb')

bb =
bb

The display of a symbolic
object is not indented.

>> x=sym('x');
>>

The symbolic variable x is created but not displayed,
since a semicolon is typed at the end of the command.

The name of the symbolic object can be different from the name of the variable.
For example:

>> g=sym('gamma')

g =
gamma

The symbolic object is gamma, and
the name of the object is g.

As  mentioned,  symbolic  objects  can  also  be  numbers.  The  numbers  don’t
have to be typed as strings. For example, the sym command is used next to cre-
ate symbolic objects from the numbers 5 and 7 and assign them to the variables
c and d, respectively.

>> c=sym(5)

Create a symbolic object from the number 5 and assign it to c.

c =
5

>> d=sym(7)

d =
7

The display of a symbolic
object is not indented.

As shown, when a symbolic object is created and a semicolon is not typed at the
end of the command, MATLAB displays the name of the object and the object
itself in the next two lines. The display of symbolic objects starts at the begin-
ning of the line and is not indented as is the display of numerical variables. The
difference is illustrated below, where a numerical variable is created.

350

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

>> e=13

e =
    13

13 is assigned to e (numerical variable).

The  display  of  the  value  of  a
numerical variable is indented.

Several  symbolic  variables  can  be  created  in  one  command  by  using  the

syms command, which has the form:

syms variable_name variable_name variable_name

The command creates symbolic objects that have the same names as the sym-
bolic variables. For example, the variables y, z, and d can all be created as sym-
bolic variables in one command by typing:

>> syms y z d

>> y
y =
y

The variables created by the syms command are
not displayed automatically. Typing the name of
the variable shows that the variable was created.

When the syms command is executed, the variables it creates are not displayed
automatically—even if a semicolon is not typed at the end of the command.

11.1.2 Creating Symbolic Expressions

Symbolic expressions are mathematical expressions written in terms of symbolic
variables.  Once  symbolic  variables  are  created,  they  can  be  used  for  creating
symbolic expressions. The symbolic expression is a symbolic object (the display
is not indented). The form for creating a symbolic expression is:

Expression_name = Mathematical expression

A few examples are:

>> syms a b c x y

Define a, b, c, x, and y as symbolic variables.

>> f=a*x^2+b*x + c

f =
a*x^2 + b*x + c

Create the symbolic expression
ax2
 and assign it to f.

bx

+

+

c

The display of the symbolic expression is not indented.

When a symbolic expression, which includes mathematical operations that can
be  executed  (addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  and  division),  is  entered,
MATLAB executes the operations as the expression is created. For example:

>> g=2*a/3+4*a/7-6.5*x+x/3+4*5/3-1.5

is entered.

11.1 Symbolic Objects and Symbolic Expressions

351

g =
(26*a)/21 - (37*x)/6 + 31/6

 is displayed.

Notice  that  all  the  calculations  are  carried  out  exactly,  with  no  numerical

approximation. In the last example,

 and

 were added by MATLAB to

give

,  and

  was  added  to

.  The  operations  with  the  terms

that contain only numbers in the symbolic expression are carried out exactly. In

the last example,

 is replaced by

.

The difference between exact and approximate calculations is demonstrated
in the following example, where the same mathematical operations are carried
out—once with symbolic variables and once with numerical variables.

>> a=sym(3); b=sym(5);

>> e=b/a+sqrt(2)

Define a and b as symbolic 3 and 5, respectively.
Create an expression that includes a and b.

e =
2^(1/2) + 5/3

>> c=3; d=5;

>> f=d/c+sqrt(2)

f =
    3.0809

An  exact  value  of  e  is  displayed  as  a  sym-
bolic object (the display is not indented).
Define c and d as numerical 3 and 5, respectively.
Create an expression that includes c and d.

An approximated value of f is displayed
as a number (the display is indented).

An expression that is created can include both symbolic objects and numer-
ical variables. However, if an expression includes a symbolic object (or several),
all the mathematical operations will be carried out exactly. For example, if c is
replaced by a in the last expression, the result is exact, as it was in the first exam-
ple.

>> g=d/a+sqrt(2)

g =
2^(1/2) + 5/3

Additional facts about symbolic expressions and symbolic objects:

• Symbolic expressions can include numerical variables that have been obtained
from the execution of numerical expressions. When these variables are inserted
in  symbolic  expressions  their  exact  value  is  used,  even  if  the  variable  was  dis-
played before with an approximated value. For example:

>> h=10/3

h =
    3.3333

h is defined to be 10/3 (a numerical variable).

An approximated value of h (numerical variable) is displayed.

352

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

>> k=sym(5); m=sym(7);

Define k and m as symbolic 5 and 7, respectively.

>> p=k/m+h

p =
85/21

h, k, and m are used in an expression.

The exact value of h is used in the determination of p.
An exact value of p (symbolic object) is displayed.

• The  double(S)  command  can  be  used  to  convert  a  symbolic  expression
(object) S that is written in an exact form to numerical form. (The name “dou-
ble” comes from the fact that the command returns a double-precision floating-
point number representing the value of S.) Two examples are shown. In the first,
the p from the last example is converted into numerical form. In the second, a
symbolic object is created and then converted into numerical form.

>> pN=double(p)

pN =
    4.0476

p is converted to numerical form (assigned to pN).

>> y=sym(10)*cos(5*pi/6)

Create a symbolic expression y.

y =
-5*3^(1/2)

>> yN=double(y)

yN =
   -8.6603

Exact value of y is displayed.

y is converted to numerical form (assigned to yN).

• A symbolic object that is created can also be a symbolic expression written in
terms of variables that were not first created as symbolic objects. For example,
the  quadratic  expression
  can  be  created  as  a  symbolic  object
c
+
named f by using the sym command:

ax2

bx

+

>> f=sym('a*x^2+b*x+c')

f =
a*x^2 + b*x +c

It  is  important  to  understand  that  in  this  case,  the  variables  a,  b,  c,  and  x
included in the object do not exist individually as independent symbolic objects
(the whole expression is one object). This means that it is impossible to perform
symbolic math operations associated with the individual variables in the object.
For example, it will not be possible to differentiate f with respect to x. This is
different from the way in which the quadratic expression was created in the first
example in this section, where the individual variables are first created as sym-
bolic objects and then used in the quadratic expression.

• Existing symbolic expressions can be used to create new symbolic expressions.
This  is  done  by  simply  using  the  name  of  the  existing  expression  in  the  new
expression. For example:

11.1 Symbolic Objects and Symbolic Expressions

353

>> syms x y

>> SA=x+y, SB=x-y

Define x and y as symbolic variables.
Create two symbolic expressions SA and SB.

SA =
x+y
SB =
x-y

SA

y+=
x

>> F=SA^2/SB^3+x^2

Create a new symbolic expression F using SA and SB.

F =
(x+y)^2/(x-y)^3+x^2

11.1.3 The findsym Command and the Default Symbolic Variable

The findsym command can be used to find which symbolic variables are pres-
ent in an existing symbolic expression. The format of the command is:

findsym(S)

or

findsym(S,n)

The  findsym(S)  command  displays  the  names  of  all  the  symbolic  variables
(separated by commas) that are in the expression S in alphabetical order. The
findsym(S,n) command displays n symbolic variables that are in expression
S in the default order. For one-letter symbolic variables, the default order starts
with x, and followed by letters, according to their closeness to x. If there are two
letters equally close to x, the letter that is after x in alphabetical order is first (y
before w, and z before v). The default symbolic variable in a symbolic expression
is  the  first  variable  in  the  default  order.  The  default  symbolic  variable  in  an
expression S can be identified by typing findsym(S,1). Examples:

>> syms x h w y d t

>> S=h*x^2+d*y^2+t*w^2

S =
t*w^2 + h*x^2 + d*y^2

>> findsym(S)

Define x, h, w, y, d, and t as symbolic variables.
Create a symbolic expression S.

Use the findsym(S) command.

ans =
d, h, t, w, x, y

The symbolic variables are displayed in alphabetical order.

>> findsym(S,5)

Use the findsym(S,n) command (n = 5).

ans =
x,y,w,t,h

Five symbolic variables are displayed in the default order.

>> findsym(S,1)

Use the findsym(S,n) command with n = 1.

ans =
x

The default symbolic variable is displayed.

