354

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

11.2 CHANGING THE FORM OF AN EXISTING SYMBOLIC EXPRESSION

Symbolic expressions are either created by the user or by MATLAB as the result
of symbolic operations. The expressions created by MATLAB might not be in
the simplest form or in a form that the user prefers. The form of an existing sym-
bolic  expression  can  be  changed  by  collecting  terms  with  the  same  power,  by
expanding products, by factoring out common multipliers, by using mathemati-
cal and trigonometric identities, and by many other operations. The following
subsections  describe  several  of  the  commands  that  can  be  used  to  change  the
form of an existing symbolic expression.

11.2.1 The collect, expand, and factor Commands

The collect, expand, and factor commands can be used to perform the
mathematical operations that are implied by their names.

The collect command:

The collect command collects the terms in the expression that have the vari-
able with the same power. In the new expression, the terms will be ordered in
decreasing order of power. The command has the forms

collect(S)

collect(S, variable_name)

where S is the expression. The collect(S) form works best when an expres-
sion has only one symbolic variable. If an expression has more than one vari-
able,  MATLAB  will  collect  the  terms  of  one  variable  first,  then  those  of  a
second variable, and so on. The order of the variables is determined by MAT-
LAB. The user can specify the first variable by using the collect(S, vari-
able_name) form of the command. Examples:

>> syms x y

Define x and y as symbolic variables.

>> S=(x^2+x-exp(x))*(x+3)
S =
(x + 3)*(x - exp(x) + x^2)

>> F = collect(S)

F =
x^3+4*x^2+(3-exp(x))*x-3*exp(x)

>> T=(2*x^2+y^2)*(x+y^2+3)
T =
(2*x^2+y^2)*(y^2+x+3)

>> G=collect(T)

Create the symbolic expression

and assign it to S.

Use the collect command.

MATLAB returns the expression:

.

Create the symbolic expression T
2x2
x
+ +

y2+

y2

3

.

Use the collect(T) command.

11.2 Changing the Form of an Existing Symbolic Expression

355

MATLAB returns the expression

2x3

+

2y2

6+ x2

+

y2x

+

y2 y2

3+

.

G =
2*x^3+(2*y^2+6)*x^2+y^2*x+y^2*(y^2+3)

>> H=collect(T,y)

Use the collect(T,y) command.

H =
y^4+(2*x^2+x+3)*y^2+2*x^2*(x+3)

MATLAB returns the expression
y4
.
3

+ + y2

2x2 x

2x2

3+

+

+

x

Note that when collect(T) is used, the reformatted expression is written in
order of decreasing powers of x, but when collect(T,y) is used, the refor-
matted expression is written in order of decreasing powers of y.

The expand command:

The expand command expands expressions in two ways. It carries out products
of  terms  that  include  summation  (used  with  at  least  one  of  the  terms),  and  it
uses  trigonometric  identities  and  exponential  and  logarithmic  laws  to  expand
corresponding terms that include summation. The form of the command is:

expand(S)

where S is the symbolic expression. Two examples are:

>> syms a x y

Define a, x, and y as symbolic variables.

>> S=(x+5)*(x-a)*(x+4)
S =
-(a-x)*(x+4)*(x+5)

>> T=expand(S)

T =
20*x-20*a-9*a*x-a*x^2+9*x^2+x^3

Create the symbolic expression

 and assign it to S.

Use the expand command.

MATLAB returns the expression

>> expand(sin(x-y))

Use the expand command to expand

.

.

ans =
cos(y)*sin(x)-cos(x)*sin(y)

MATLAB uses trig identity for the expansion.

The factor command:

The factor command changes an expression that is a polynomial to a product
of polynomials of a lower degree. The form of the command is:

factor(S)

where S is the symbolic expression. An example is:

356

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

>> syms x

>> S=x^3+4*x^2-11*x-30
S =
x^3+4*x^2-11*x-30

>> factor(S)

ans =
(x+5)*(x-3)*(x+2)

Define x as a symbolic variable.

Create the symbolic expression

 and assign it to S.

Use the factor command.

MATLAB returns the expression

.

11.2.2 The simplify Command

The simplify command is a tool for simplifying the form of an expression.
The simplify command uses mathematical operations (addition, multiplica-
tion, rules of fractions, powers, logarithms, etc.) and functional and trigonomet-
ric  identities  to  generate  a  simpler  form  of  the  expression.  The  format  of  the
simplify command is:

simplify(S)

where either S is the name of the
existing expression to be simplified,

or

an expression to be simplified
can be typed in for S.

Two examples are:

>> syms x y

>> S=(x^2+5*x+6)/(x+2)

S =
(x^2+5*x+6)/(x+2)

Define x and y as symbolic variables.

Create the symbolic expression

, and assign it to S.

>> SA = simplify(S)

Use the simplify command to simplify S.

SA =
x+3

MATLAB simplifies the expres-
sion to

3+

x

.

>> simplify((x+y)/(1/x+1/y))

Simplify

.

ans =
x*y

MATLAB simplifies the expression to

xy

).

11.2.3 The pretty Command

The pretty command displays a symbolic expression in a format resembling
the  mathematical  format  in  which  expressions  are  generally  typed.  The  com-
mand has the form

Example:

pretty(S)

