11.6 Solving an Ordinary Differential Equation

365

•

•

It is possible also to use the int command by typing the expression to be inte-
grated as a string without having the variables in the expression first created as
symbolic objects. However, the variables in the integrated expression do not exist
as independent symbolic objects.

Integration  can  sometimes  be  a  difficult  task.  A  closed-form  answer  may  not
exist, or if it exists, MATLAB might not be able to find it. When that happens
MATLAB returns int(S) and the message Explicit integral could
not be found.

11.6 SOLVING AN ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION

An  ordinary  differential  equation  (ODE)  can  be  solved  symbolically  with  the
dsolve command. The command can be used to solve a single equation or a
system of equations. Only single equations are addressed here. Chapter 10 dis-
cusses  using  MATLAB  to  solve  first-order  ODEs  numerically.  The  reader’s
familiarity with the subject of differential equations is assumed. The purpose of
this section is to show how to use MATLAB for solving such equations.

A first-order ODE is an equation that contains the derivative of the depen-
dent variable. If t is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable, the
equation can be written in the form

dy
------
dt

=

f t y,

A second-order ODE contains the second derivative of the dependent variable
(it can also contain the first derivative). Its general form is:

=

d2y
dt2--------
 that satisfies the equation. The solution can be
A solution is a function
general  or  particular.  A  general  solution  contains  constants.  In  a  particular
solution  the  constants  are  determined  to  have  specific  numerical  values  such
that the solution satisfies specific initial or boundary conditions.

dy
------
dt

f t=

t y
,

y

f

,

The  command  dsolve  can  be  used  for  obtaining  a  general  solution  or,
when the initial or boundary conditions are specified, for obtaining a particular
solution.

General solution:

 For obtaining a general solution, the dsolve command has the form:

dsolve(‘eq’)

or

dsolve(‘eq’,‘var’)

• eq is the equation to be solved. It has to be typed as a string (even if the vari-

ables are symbolic objects).

• The variables in the equation don’t have to first be created as symbolic objects.
(If they have not been created, then, in the solution the variables will not be sym-

366

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

bolic objects.)

• Any letter (lowercase or uppercase), except D can be used for the dependent vari-

able.

•

•

•

In  the  dsolve(‘eq’)  command  the  independent  variable  is  assumed  by
MATLAB to be t (default).

In  the  dsolve(‘eq’,‘var’)  command  the  user  defines  the  independent
variable by typing it for var (as a string).

In specifying the equation the letter D denotes differentiation. If y is the depen-

dent variable and t is the independent variable, Dy stands for

dy
------
dt

. For example,

the equation

dy
------
dt

3y+

=

100

 is typed in as‘Dy + 3*y = 100’.

• A second derivative is typed as D2, third derivative as D3, and so on. For exam-

ple, the equation

= sin(t)’.

d2y
dt2--------

+

3

dy
------
dt

+

5y

sin=

t

 is typed in as: ‘D2y + 3*Dy + 5*y

• The variables in the ODE equation that is typed in the dsolve command do

not have to be previously created symbolic variables.

•

In the solution MATLAB uses C1, C2, C3, and so on, for the constants of inte-
gration.

For  example,  a  general  solution  of  the  first-order  ODE

dy
------
dt

=

4t

2y+

  is

obtained by:

>> dsolve('Dy=4*t+2*y')

ans =
C1*exp(2*t) - 2*t - 1

The answer

 is displayed.

A general solution of the second-order ODE

d2x
---------
dt2

+

2

dx
------
dt

+

x

0=

 is obtained by:

>> dsolve('D2x+2*Dx+x=0')

ans =
C1/exp(t)+(C2*t)/exp(t)

The answer

 is displayed.

The following examples illustrate the solution of differential equations that con-
tain symbolic variables in addition to the independent and dependent variables.

>> dsolve('Ds=a*x^2')

ans =
a*t*x^2 + C1

The independent variable is t (default).

MATLAB solves the equation

=

ax2

.

ds
-----
dt

The solution

s

=

ax2t C1+

 is displayed.

11.6 Solving an Ordinary Differential Equation

367

>> dsolve('Ds=a*x^2','x')

The independent variable is defined to be x.

ans =
(a*x^3)/3 + C1

>> dsolve('Ds=a*x^2','a')

ans =
(a^2*x^2)/2 + C2

Particular solution:

MATLAB solves the equation

ds
------
dx

=

ax2

.

The solution

s

=

1
---ax3 C1+
3

 is displayed.

The independent variable is defined to be a.

MATLAB solves the equation

=

ax2

.

ds
------
da

The solution

s

=

1
---a2x2 C1+
2

 is displayed.

A particular solution of an ODE can be obtained if boundary (or initial) condi-
tions  are  specified.  A  first-order  equation  requires  one  condition,  a  second-
order equation requires two conditions, and so on. For obtaining a particular
solution, the dsolve command has the form

First-order ODE:

dsolve(‘eq’,‘cond1’,‘var’)

Higher-order ODE:

dsolve(‘eq’,‘cond1’,‘cond2’,....,‘var’)

• For solving equations of higher order, additional boundary conditions have to
be entered in the command. If the number of conditions is less than the order of
the equation, MATLAB returns a solution that includes constants of integration
(C1, C2, C3, and so on).

• The boundary conditions are typed in as strings in the following:

Math form
A=
y a
A=

y a

y

a

A=

MATLAB form
‘y(a)=A’
‘Dy(a)=A’
‘D2y(a)=A’

• The argument ‘var’ is optional and is used to define the independent variable

in the equation. If none is entered, the default is t.

For  example,  the  first-order  ODE

dy
------
dt
 is solved with MATLAB by:

y 0

5=

4y+

60=

,  with  the  initial  condition

>> dsolve('Dy+4*y=60','y(0)=5')

ans =
15 - 10/exp(4*t)

The answer

 is displayed.

