368

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

The  second-order  ODE

solved with MATLAB by:

,

y 0

1=

,

dy
------
dt

t

0=

0=

,  can  be

>> dsolve('D2y-2*Dy+2*y=0','y(0)=1','Dy(0)=0')

ans =
exp(t)*cos(t)-exp(t)*sin(t)

The answer

 is displayed.

>> factor(ans)

The answer can be simplified with the factor command.

ans =
exp(t)*(cos(t)-sin(t))

The simplified answer
is displayed.

Additional  examples  of  solving  differential  equations  are  shown  in  Sample
Problem 11-5.

If  MATLAB  cannot  find  a  solution,  it  returns  an  empty  symbolic  object
and  the  message  Warning:  explicit  solution  could  not  be
found.

11.7 PLOTTING SYMBOLIC EXPRESSIONS

In many cases, there is a need to plot a symbolic expression. This can easily be
done  with  the  ezplot  command.  For  a  symbolic  expression  S  that  contains
one variable var, MATLAB considers the expression to be a function
,
 versus var. For a symbolic expression
and the command creates a plot of
that contains two symbolic variables var1 and var2, MATLAB considers the
expression  to  be  a  function  in  the  form
,  and  the  command
creates a plot of one variable versus the other.

S var1 var2

S var

S var

0=

,

To  plot  a  symbolic  expression  S  that  contains  one  or  two  variables,  the

ezplot command is:

ezplot(S)

Domain of independent variable.

Domain of dependent variable.

or

or

ezplot(S,[min,max])

ezplot(S,[xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax])

• S is the symbolic expression to be plotted. It can be the name of a previously cre-

ated symbolic expression, or an expression can be typed in for S.

•

•

It is also possible to type the expression to be plotted as a string without having
the variables in the expression first created as symbolic objects.

If S has one symbolic variable, a plot of
 is created, with the
values of var (the independent variable) on the abscissa (horizontal axis), and the
values of

 on the ordinate (vertical axis).

 versus

S var

S var

var

11.7 Plotting Symbolic Expressions

369

•

•

•

•

If the symbolic expression S has two symbolic variables, var1 and var2, the
expression is assumed to be a function with the form
. MAT-
LAB creates a plot of one variable versus the other variable. The variable that is
first in alphabetic order is taken to be the independent variable. For example, if
the variables in S are x and y, then x is the independent variable and is plotted on
the abscissa and y is the dependent variable plotted on the ordinate. If the vari-
ables in S are u and v, then u is the independent variable and v is the dependent
variable.

S var1 var2

0=

,

In the ezplot(S) command, if S has one variable (
the  domain
MATLAB.  If  S  has  two  variables  (

), the plot is over
  (default  domain)  and  the  range  is  selected  by
is  over

),  the  plot

S var1 var2

S var

,

 and

.

In  the  ezplot(S,[min,max])  command  the  domain  for  the  independent
variable  is  defined  by  min  and  max:—
—and  the  range  is
selected by MATLAB.

In the ezplot(S,[xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax]) command the domain for
the independent variable is defined by xmin and xmax, and the domain of the
dependent variable is defined by ymin and ymax.

The ezplot command can also be used to plot a function that is given in a
parametric  form.  In  this  case  two  symbolic  expressions,  S1  and  S2,  are
involved, where each expression is written in terms of the same symbolic vari-
able  (independent  parameter).  For  example,  for  a  plot  of  y  versus  x  where
x

, the form of the ezplot command is:

 and

x t

y t

=

=

y

ezplot(S1,S2)

Domain of independent parameter.

or

ezplot(S1,S2,[min,max])

• S1 and S2 are symbolic expressions containing the same single symbolic vari-
able, which is the independent parameter. S1 and S2 can be the names of previ-
ously created symbolic expressions, or expressions can be typed in.

• The command creates a plot of

. The symbolic expres-
sion that is typed first in the command (S1 in the definition above) is used for
the horizontal axis, and the expression that is typed second (S2 in the definition
above) is used for the vertical axis.

 versus

S1 var

S2 var

•

•

In the ezplot(S1,S2)command the domain of the independent variable is
0

 (default domain).

var

<

<

2

In the ezplot(S1,S2,[min,max])command the domain for the indepen-
dent variable is defined by min and max:

var max
<

min

<

.

370

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

Additional comments:

Once a plot is created, it can be formatted in the same way as plots created with
the plot or fplot format. This can be done in two ways: by using commands
or  by  using  the  Plot  Editor  (see  Section  5.4).  When  the  plot  is  created,  the
expression that is plotted is displayed automatically at the top of the plot. MAT-
LAB has additional plot functions for plotting two-dimensional polar plots and
for  plotting  three-dimensional  plots.  For  more  information,  the  reader  is
referred to the Help menu of the Symbolic Math Toolbox.

Several examples of using the ezplot command are shown in Table 11-1.

Table 11-1: Plots with the ezplot command

Command

Plot

(3 x + 2)/(4 x - 1)

-6

-4

-2

0
x

2

4

6

12 y - 18 x + 4 x2 + 4 y2 - 11

-6

-4

-2

0
x

2

4

6

x = cos(2 t), y = sin(4 t)

>> syms x
>> S=(3*x+2)/(4*x-1)
S =
(3*x+2)/(4*x-1)
>> ezplot(S)

>> syms x y
>> S=4*x^2-
18*x+4*y^2+12*y-11
S =
4*x^2-18*x+4*y^2+12*y-11
>> ezplot(S)

>> syms t
>> x=cos(2*t)
x =
cos(2*t)
>> y=sin(4*t)
y =
sin(4*t)
>> ezplot(x,y)

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

y

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

0.5

y

0

-0.5

-1

-0.5

0
x

0.5

1

