2.11 Problems

55

A  variable  can  be  defined  as  either  a  number  or  a  string  made  up  of  the
same digits. For example, as shown below, x is defined to be the number 536,
and y is defined to be a string made up of the digits 536.

>> x=536

x =
   536

>> y='536'

y =
536
>>

The  two  variables  are  not  the  same  even  though  they  appear  identical  on  the
screen. Note that the characters 536 in the line below the x= are indented, while
the characters 536 in the line below the y= are not indented. The variable x can
be used in mathematical expressions, whereas the variable y cannot.

2.11 PROBLEMS

1. Create a variable a that is a row vector with the following elements: 9, 1, 32,
.

, 0.8, and

7/4, 0,

2. Create a variable b that is a row vector with the following elements:

,

,

, 15.8,

, and

.

3. Create  a  variable  c  that  is  a  column  vector  with  the  following  elements:

,

, 28.5, 2.74/3, and e3.

4. Create  a  variable  d  that  is  a  column  vector  with  the  following  elements:

, 11.1,

,

,

, and 0.116.

5. Define the variables

, and then use them to create a row
vector (assign it to a variable named e) that has the following elements: x/y,
x+y, xy,

, y2, and x.

 and

6. Define the variables

, and then use them to create a col-
umn vector (assign it to a variable named f) that has the following elements:
d2, c, (c+d), cd, and d.

 and

7. Create a variable g that is a row vector in which the first element is 3 and the
last element is 27, with an increment of 4 between the elements (3, 7, 11, … ,
27).

56

Chapter 2: Creating Arrays

8. Create a variable h that is a row vector with eight equally spaced elements in

which the first element is 68 and the last element is 12.

9. Create a variable M that is a column vector in which the first element is 6.4,
the elements increase with increments of 0.8, and the last element is 12. (A
column vector can be created by the transpose of a row vector.)

10. Create a variable  N that is a column vector with seven equally spaced ele-
ments in which the first element is 44 and the last element is 23. (A column
vector can be created by the transpose of a row vector.)

11. Using  the  colon  symbol,  create  a  row  vector  (assign  it  to  a  variable  named
Time) in which the first element is 0, the spacing is 1, and the last element is 20.

12. Using the linspace command, create a row vector (assign it to a variable

named Fours) with nine elements that are all 4.

13. Using the colon symbol, create a variable named Sevens that is a row vec-

tor of seven elements that are all the number 7.

14. Use a single command to create a row vector (assign it to a variable named
P) with eight elements such that the last element is 5.9 and the rest of the ele-
ments are 0s. Do not type the vector elements explicitly.

15. Use a single command to create a row vector (assign it to a variable named
q) with nine elements such that the last four elements are 8.1 and the rest of
the elements are 0s. Do not type the vector elements explicitly.

16. Use a single command to create a row vector (assign it to a variable named

R) with 10 elements such that
R =

     -4    -1    2    5    8   14   18    22    26    30

Do not type the vector elements explicitly.

17. Create  two  row  vectors  v=41:-3:29  and  w=17:4:37.  Then,  by  only
using the name of the vectors (v and w), create a row vector u that is made
from the elements of w followed by the elements of v.

18. Create two column vectors T=[5:5:25]’ and S=[27:2:33]’. Then, by
only using the name of the vectors (T and S), create a column vector R that
is made from the elements of T followed by the elements of S.

19. Create  a  row  vectors  A=4:3:13  and  a  column  vector  B=[14:-2:6]’.
Then only using the name of the vectors (A and B), create the following:
(a) A row vector C that is made from the elements of B followed by the ele-

ments of A.

2.11 Problems

57

(b) A column vector D that is made from the elements of A followed by the

elements of B.

20. Create a row vector vA=1:3:34 that has 12 elements. Then, create a new
nine-element vector vB from the elements of vA such that the first five ele-
ments are the first five elements of the vector vA, and the last four are the
last four elements of the vector vA. Use the colon symbol to address a range
of elements. (Do not type the elements of the vector vA explicitly.)

21. Create a row vector vC=2:3:38 that has 13 elements. Then, create the fol-

lowing new vectors by assigning elements of vC to the new vectors:
(a) A vector (name it vCodd) that contains all the elements with odd index

of vC; i.e., vCodd = 2 8 14 ... 38.

(b) A  vector  (name  it  vCeven)  that  contains  all  the  elements  with  even

index of vC; i.e., vCeven = 5 11 17 ... 35.

In both parts use vectors of odd and even numbers to address the elements
of vC that are assigned to vCodd, and vCeven, respectively. Do not enter
the elements of the vectors explicitly.

22. Create two row vectors vD=20:4:44 and vE=50:3:71. Then, create the
following new vectors by assigning elements of vD and vE  to the new vec-
tors:
(a) A vector (name it vDE) that contains the 2nd through the 5th elements
of vD  and the 4th through 7th elements of vE; i.e., vDE  =  24    28
32  36  59  62  65  68.

(b) A  vector  (name  it  vED)  that  contains  elements  6,  5, 4,  3,  and  2  of  vE
and elements 4, 3, 2, and 1 of vD; i.e., vED = 65  62  59  56  53
32  28  24  20.

In  both  parts  use  vectors  to  address  the  elements  of  vD  and  vE  that  are
assigned to vDE and vED, respectively. Do not enter the elements of the vec-
tors explicitly.

23. Create a nine-element row vector vF=5:7:61. Then create a vector (name
it vFrev) that consist of the elements of vF in reverse order. Do it by using
a vector to address the elements of VF. (Do not type the elements of vF vec-
tor explicitly.)

24. Create  the  following  matrix  by  assigning  vectors  with  constant  spacing  to
the rows (use the linspace command for the third row). Do not type indi-
vidual elements explicitly.
A =

  1.0000 2.0000 3.0000 4.0000 5.0000 6.0000 7.0000
  7.0000 6.0000 5.0000 4.0000 3.0000 2.0000 1.0000
  2.0000 3.1667 4.3333 5.5000 6.6667 7.8333 9.0000

58

Chapter 2: Creating Arrays

25. Create the following vector by using the linspace command. Do not type

individual elements explicitly.
B =
    4    4    4    4    4    5    5    5    5

26. Create the following matrix by typing one command. Do not type individ-

ual elements explicitly.
C =

     6    8
     6    8
     6    8
     6    8
     6    8

27. Create the following matrix by typing one command. Do not type individ-

ual elements explicitly.
D =

     1     1     1     1
     1     1     1     1
     1     1     1     1
     8     6     4     2

28. Create the following matrix by typing one command. Do not type individ-

ual elements explicitly.
E =

     0     0     0     0     8
     0     0     0     0     7
     0     0     0     0     6

29. Create the following matrix by typing one command. Do not type individ-

ual elements explicitly.
F =

     0     0     0     0     0     0
     0     0     0     0     0     0
     0     0     8     6     4     2

30. Create the following matrix by typing one command. Do not type individ-

ual elements explicitly.
G =

     1     1     1     1     1
     1     1     1     1     1
     1     1     1     1     1
     0     0     0     1     1
     0     0     0     1     1
     0     0     0     1     1

2.11 Problems

59

31. Create the following three row vectors:

a=[5 8 -1 0 2], b=[4 1 9 -2 3], and c=[-3 5 0 6 1].
(a) Use the three vectors in a MATLAB command to create a nine-element
row vector consisting from the first three elements of the vectors a, b,
and c, respectively (i.e., 5 8 -1 4 1 9 -3 5 0).

(b) Use the three vectors in a MATLAB command to create a nine-element
column vector consisting from the last three elements of the vectors a,
b, and c, respectively.

32. Create the following three row vectors:

a=[5 8 -1 0 2], b=[4 1 9 -2 3], and c=[-3 5 0 6 1].
(a) Use the three vectors in a MATLAB command to create a
in which the rows are the vectors c, b, and a, respectively.
(b) Use the three vectors in a MATLAB command to create a

 matrix

 matrix

in which the columns are the vectors c, b, and a, respectively.

33. Create the following two row vectors:

d=[6-1 4 0 -2 5], and e=[7 5 9 0 1 3].
(a) Use the two vectors in a MATLAB command to create a

 matrix
such that the first row consists of elements 2 through 4 of vector d, the
second row consists of elements 3 through 5 of vector e, and the third
row consists of elements 4 through 6 of vector d.

(b) Use the two vectors in a MATLAB command to create a

 matrix
such that the first column consists of elements 2 through 5 of vector d,
and the second column consists of elements 3 through 6 of vector e.

34. By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB. In parts (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) use the vector
that was defined in part (a).
(a) a=2:2:20
(d) d=a(8:-1:4)
(f) e=[a(2:5)’ a(6:9)’]

(e)  e=[a(1:5);a(6:10)]

(c) c=a(1:2:7)

(b) b=a(4:8)

35. Create the following vector:

v=[5 0 -3 7 6 -1 2 8 4 9]
By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
(a) a=v([4 5:7 10])
(c)  c=[b' a']

(b) b=v([9, 1, 6:-2:2])'

60

Chapter 2: Creating Arrays

36. Create the following vectors:

u=[0 9 -5 6 3 -1 2] and  w=[-2 3 7 -4 0 1 5]
By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
(a) A=[u(2:5);w([7 5]) u([6 7])]
(b) B=[w(4:7)', zeros(4,2), u([1 3 5 7])']

37. Create the following matrix M:

M =

     1     7     13     19     25
     3     9     15     21     27
     5    11     17     23     29

By writing one command and using the colon to address range of elements
(do not type individual elements explicitly), use the matrix M to:
(a) Create a five-element row vector named Va that contains the elements

of the third row of M.

(b) Create a three-element column vector named Vb that contains the ele-

ments of the fourth column of M.

(c) Create  an  eight-element  row  vector  named  Vc  that  contains  the  ele-
ments of the second row of M followed by the elements of the third col-
umn of M.

38. Create the following matrix N:

N =

     0     3     6     9     12     15
    18    21    24    27     30     33
    36    39    42    45     48     51

(It can be done by typing: N=reshape(0:3:51,6,3)'.)
By writing one command and using the colon to address range of elements
(do not type individual elements explicitly), use the matrix N to:

(a) Create a six-element row vector named Ua that contains the first three
elements of the first row of N followed by the last three elements of the
third row of N.

(b) Create  a  nine-element  column  vector  named  Ub  that  contains  the  ele-
ments of the first column of N, followed by the elements of the third col-
umn of N, followed by the elements of the sixth column of N.

(c) Create a six-element column vector named Uc that contains elements 2, 3,
4, and 5 of the second row of N, followed by elements 2 and 3 of the fifth
column of N.

2.11 Problems

61

39. Create the following matrix G:

G =
   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7
    10     9     8     7     6     5     4
     0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0   1.2
     5     3     1    -1    -3    -5    -7

(a)  Create a

 matrix Ma from the first, third, and fourth rows and the

first two and last two columns of matrix G.

(b) Create  a

  matrix  Mb  from  the  first  three  rows  and  the  second,

fourth, and sixth columns of matrix G.

40. Create the following matrix K:

K =

  0.25   0.5  0.75   1.0  1.25   1.5  1.75
     2     4     6     8    10    12    14
    25    30    35    40    45    50    55

(a)  Create a

 matrix Ga such that its first row includes the elements of
the second column of K followed by the elements of the fifth column of
K, the second row of Ga includes the first six elements of the second row
of K, and the third row of Ga includes the last six elements of the third
row of K.
(b) Create a
6 of K.

 matrix Gb from the first two rows and columns 3 through

41. The following matrix is defined in MATLAB:

S =
     1     2     3     4     5     6
     7     8     9    10    11    12
    13    14    15    16    17    18
    19    20    21    22    23    24

By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
(a) A=S(2,[2,4])
(c) C=S([2:4],[4:6])

(b) B=S(3,[3:5])
(d) D=S(:,[1:3])

42. The following matrix is defined in MATLAB:

T =
     2     4     6     8    10
    12    14    16    18    20
    22    24    26    28    30

62

Chapter 2: Creating Arrays

By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
(a) D=[T(1,1:4);T(3,2:5)]
(b) E=[T(:,4); T(2,:)']
(c) F(3:5,3:5)=T(1:3,1:3)

43. By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
V=[1:2:11;13:2:23]
V(:,4:6)=V(:,1:3)
V(3:4,:)=V
V(:,[2:3 5:6])=[]

44. Using the zeros, ones, and eye commands, create the following arrays by

typing one command:

(a)

           (b)

              (c)

45. Use the eye, ones, and zeros commands to create the following arrays:

Using the variables A, B, and C, write a command that creates the following
matrix D:

