3.5 Using Arrays in MATLAB Built-in Math Functions

75

3.5 USING ARRAYS IN MATLAB BUILT-IN MATH
FUNCTIONS

The  built-in  functions  in  MATLAB  are  written  such  that  when  the  argument
(input) is an array, the operation that is defined by the function is executed on
each  element  of  the  array.  (One  can  think  of  the  operation  as  element-by-ele-
ment application of the function.) The result (output) from such an operation is
an array in which each element is calculated by entering the corresponding ele-
ment of the argument (input) array into the function. For example, if a vector
with seven elements is substituted in the function cos(x), the result is a vector
with  seven  elements  in  which  each  element  is  the  cosine  of  the  corresponding
element in x. This is shown below.

>> x=[0:pi/6:pi]

x =
    0   0.5236   1.0472   1.5708   2.0944    2.6180    3.1416

>>y=cos(x)

y =
    1.0000      0.8660      0.5000      0.0000    -0.5000    -0.8660    -
1.0000
>>

An example in which the argument variable is a matrix is:

>> d=[1 4 9; 16 25 36; 49 64 81]

Creating a

 array.

d =
     1     4     9
    16    25    36
    49    64    81

>> h=sqrt(d)

h =
     1     2     3
     4     5     6
     7     8     9

h  is  a
  array  in  which  each
element  is  the  square  root  of  the
corresponding element in array d.

The feature of MATLAB in which arrays can be used as arguments in functions
is called vectorization.

3.6 BUILT-IN FUNCTIONS FOR ANALYZING ARRAYS

MATLAB has many built-in functions for analyzing arrays. Table 3-1 lists some
of these functions.

76

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

Function

mean(A)

C=max(A)

[d,n]=max(A)

min(A)

[d,n]=min(A)

sum(A)

sort(A)

Table 3-1: Built-in array functions

Description

Example

If A is a vector, returns the
mean value of the elements
of the vector.

>> A=[5 9 2 4];
>> mean(A)
ans =
     5

If A is a vector, C is the
largest element in A. If A is
a matrix, C is a row vector
containing the largest ele-
ment of each column of A.

>> A=[5 9 2 4 11 6 11
1];
>> C=max(A)
C =
    11

If A is a vector, d is the
largest element in A, and n
is the position of the ele-
ment (the first if several
have the max value).

The same as max(A), but
for the smallest element.

The same as [d,n]=
max(A), but for the small-
est element.

If A is a vector, returns the
sum of the elements of the
vector.

>> [d,n]=max(A)
d =
    11
n =
     5

>> A=[5 9 2 4];
>> min(A)
ans =
     2

>> A=[5 9 2 4];
>> sum(A)
ans =
    20

If A is a vector, arranges
the elements of the vector
in ascending order.

>> A=[5 9 2 4];
>> sort(A)
ans =
   2     4     5     9

median(A)

If A is a vector, returns the
median value of the ele-
ments of the vector.

>> A=[5 9 2 4];
>> median(A)
ans =
    4.5000

