80

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

>> v=4*randn(1,6)+50

v =
   42.7785   57.4344   47.5819   50.4134   52.2527   50.4544

Integers  of  normally  distributed  numbers  can  be  obtained  by  using  the

round function.

>> w=round(4*randn(1,6)+50)

w =
    51    49    46    49    50    44

3.8 EXAMPLES OF MATLAB APPLICATIONS

Sample Problem 3-2: Equivalent force system (addition of vectors)

Three forces are applied to a bracket as
shown.  Determine  the  total  (equiva-
lent) force applied to the bracket.

y

F3 = 700 N

Solution

A force is a vector (a physical quantity
that has a magnitude and direction). In
a  Cartesian  coordinate  system  a  two-
dimensional vector F can be written as:

F2 = 500 N

143o

30o

x

20o

F1 = 400 N

F

=

Fxi Fyj+

=

F

cos

i

+

F

sin

j

=

F

cos

i

sin+

j

 is its angle relative to the x axis, Fx
where F is the magnitude of the force and
and  Fy  are  the  components  of  F  in  the  directions  of  the  x  and  y  axes,  respec-
tively, and i and j are unit vectors in these directions. If Fx and Fy are known,
then F and   can be determined by:

F

=

2+
2 Fy
Fx

  and

tan

Fy
------=
Fx

The  total  (equivalent)  force  applied  on  the  bracket  is  obtained  by  adding  the
forces  that  are  acting  on  the  bracket.  The  MATLAB  solution  below  follows
three steps:
• Write each force as a vector with two elements, where the first element is the x

component of the vector and the second element is the y component.

• Determine the vector form of the equivalent force by adding the vectors.

• Determine the magnitude and direction of the equivalent force.

The problem is solved in the following program, written in a script file.

3.8 Examples of MATLAB Applications

81

% Sample Problem 3-2 solution (script file)
clear

F1M=400; F2M=500; F3M=700;

Th1=-20; Th2=30; Th3=143;

Define variables with the
magnitude of each vector.

Define variables with the angle of each vector.

F1=F1M*[cosd(Th1) sind(Th1)]

F2=F2M*[cosd(Th2) sind(Th2)]

F3=F3M*[cosd(Th3) sind(Th3)]

Define the three vectors.

Ftot=F1+F2+F3

Calculate the total force vector.

FtotM=sqrt(Ftot(1)^2+Ftot(2)^2)

Th=atand(Ftot(2)/Ftot(1))

Calculate  the  magnitude
of the total force vector.

Calculate the angle of the total force vector.

When the program is executed, the following is displayed in the Command Win-
dow:

F1 =
  375.8770 -136.8081

F2 =
  433.0127  250.0000

F3 =
 -559.0449  421.2705

Ftot =
  249.8449  534.4625

FtotM =
  589.9768

Th =
   64.9453

The components of F1.

The components of F2.

The components of F3.

The components of the total force.

The magnitude of the total force.

The direction of the total force in degrees.

The equivalent force has a magnitude of 589.98 N, and is directed
relative to the x axis. In vector notation, the force is
+

249.84i

=

F

64.95

534.46j

 (ccw)
 N.

82

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

Sample Problem 3-3: Friction experiment (element-by-element

calculations)

The coefficient of friction,
 can be determined in
an  experiment by  measuring the force  F  required
to move a mass m. When F is measured and m is
known, the coefficient of friction can be calculated
by:

=

F mg

  (g = 9.81 m/s2).

F

m

Friction

Results from measuring F in six tests are given in the table below. Determine the
coefficient of friction in each test, and the average from all tests.

Test

Mass m (kg)

1

2

2

4

Force F (N)

12.5

23.5

3

5

30

4

10

61

5

20

117

6

50

294

Solution

A  solution  using  MATLAB  commands  in  the  Command  Window  is  shown
below.

>> m=[2 4 5 10 20 50];

Enter the values of m in a vector.

>> F=[12.5 23.5 30 61 117 294];

Enter the values of F in a vector.

>> mu=F./(m*9.81)

mu =

A value for mu is calculated for each test,
using element-by-element calculations.

   0.6371   0.5989   0.6116   0.6218   0.5963   0.5994

>> mu_ave=mean(mu)

mu_ave =
    0.6109

The average of the elements in the vector mu
is determined by using the function mean.

3.8 Examples of MATLAB Applications

83

Sample Problem 3-4: Electrical resistive network analysis (solving a

system of linear equations)

The  electrical  circuit  shown  consists  of
resistors  and  voltage  sources.  Determine
the current in each resistor using the mesh
current method, which is based on Kirch-
hoff’s voltage law.

V,
V2
,
R2
,
R5
,
R8

20=
18=
6=
12=

V1
R1
R4
R7
Solution

V,
V3
,
R3
,
R6

12=
10=
15=
14=

V
40=
16=
8=

R1

i1

V1

+

_

R2

R4

R5

i2

R3

i3
R6

+
_

V2

_
+

i4

R7

V3

Kirchhoff’s  voltage  law  states  that  the
sum of the voltage around a closed circuit
is zero. In the mesh current method a cur-
rent is first assigned for each mesh (i1, i2,
i3, i4 in the figure). Then Kirchhoff’s volt-
age  law  is  applied  for  each  mesh.  This
results in a system of linear equations for the currents (in this case four equa-
tions). The solution gives the values of the mesh currents. The current in a resis-
tor that belongs to two meshes is the sum of the currents in the corresponding
meshes. It is convenient to assume that all the currents are in the same direction
(clockwise in this case). In the equation for each mesh, the voltage source is pos-
itive if the current flows to the – pole, and the voltage of a resistor is negative for
current in the direction of the mesh current.

R8

The equations for the four meshes in the current problem are:

The four equations can be rewritten in matrix form [A][x] = [B]:

84

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

The problem is solved in the following program, written in a script file:

V1=20; V2=12; V3=40;

R1=18; R2=10; R3=16; R4=6;

R5=15; R6=8; R7=12; R8=14;

A=[-(R1+R2+R3) R2 R3 0
R2 -(R2+R4+R5+R7) R4 R7
R3 R4 -(R3+R4+R6) R6
0 R7 R6 -(R6+R7+R8)]

>> B=[-V1; 0; V2; -V3]

Define variables with the
values of the V’s and R’s.

Create the matrix A.

Create the vector B.

>> I=A\B

Solve for the currents by using left division.

When  the  script  file  is  executed,  the  following  is  displayed  in  the  Command
Window:

A =
   -44    10    16    0
    10   -43     6   12
    16     6   -30    8
     0    12     8  -34

B =
   -20
     0
    12
   -40

I =
    0.8411
    0.7206
    0.6127
    1.5750
>>

i1
i2
i3
i4

The numerical value
of the matrix A.

The numerical value
of the vector B.

The solution.

=

=

i1

i4

A,

0.7206

0.8411

A, and

The last column vector gives the current in each mesh. The currents in the resis-
tors R1, R5, and R8 are
A, respec-
i2
tively. The other resistors belong to two meshes and their current is the sum of
the currents in the meshes.
The current in resistor R2 is
The current in resistor R3 is
The current in resistor R4 is
The current in resistor R6 is
The current in resistor R7 is

A.
A.
A.
A.
A.

1.5750

=

3.8 Examples of MATLAB Applications

85

Sample Problem 3-5: Motion of two particles

t

0=

A train and a car are approaching a road crossing.
At time
 the train is 400 ft south of the cross-
ing traveling north at a constant speed of 54 mi/h.
At the same time the car is 200 ft west of the cross-
ing traveling east at a speed of 28 mi/h and acceler-
ating at 4 ft/s2. Determine the positions of the train
and  the  car,  the  distance  between  them,  and  the
speed  of  the  train  relative  to  the  car  every  second
for the next 10 seconds.

To show the results, create an

 matrix in
which each row has the time in the first column and
the  train  position,  car  position,  distance  between
the train and the car, car speed, and the speed of the train relative to the car in
the next five columns, respectively.

11

6

Solution

The position of an object that moves along a straight line at a constant accelera-

tion is given by

 where s0 and v0 are the position and velocity at
, and a is the acceleration. Applying this equation to the train and the car

t
0=
gives:

    (train)

    (car)

The distance between the car and the train is:
train is constant and in vector notation is given by
accelerating  and  its  velocity  at  time  t  is  given  by
velocity  of

relative

train

the

the

=

x2
vtrain
vcar

y2+
. The velocity of the
. The car is
=
.  The
acart
=
i
to
is  given  by
vt c
. The magnitude (speed) of this velocity

votrainj
vocar
+
,

car,

d

is the length of the vector.

The problem is solved in the following program, written in a script file. First
a vector t with 11 elements for the time from 0 to 10 s is created, then the posi-
tions of the train and the car, the distance between them, and the speed of the
train relative to the car at each time element are calculated.

v0train=54*5280/3600; v0car=28*5280/3600; acar=4;

Create variables for the initial velocities (in ft/s) and the acceleration.

t=0:10;

y=-400+v0train*t;

x=-200+v0car*t+0.5*acar*t.^2;

Create the vector t.

Calculate the train and
car positions.

d=sqrt(x.^2+y.^2);

Calculate the distance between the train and car.

