86

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

vcar=v0car+acar*t;

Calculate the car’s velocity.

speed_trainRcar=sqrt(vcar.^2+v0train^2);

Calculate the speed of the train relative to the car.

table=[t' y' x' d' vcar' speed_trainRcar']

Create a table (see note below).

Note:  In  the  commands  above,  table  is  the  name  of  the  variable  that  is  a
matrix containing the data to be displayed.

When the script file is executed, the following is displayed in the Command

Window:

table =
         0 -400.0000 -200.0000  447.2136   41.0667   89.2139
    1.0000 -320.8000 -156.9333  357.1284   45.0667   91.1243
    2.0000 -241.6000 -109.8667  265.4077   49.0667   93.1675
    3.0000 -162.4000  -58.8000  172.7171   53.0667   95.3347
    4.0000  -83.2000   -3.7333   83.2837   57.0667   97.6178
    5.0000   -4.0000   55.3333   55.4777   61.0667  100.0089
    6.0000   75.2000  118.4000  140.2626   65.0667  102.5003
    7.0000  154.4000  185.4667  241.3239   69.0667  105.0849
    8.0000  233.6000  256.5333  346.9558   73.0667  107.7561
    9.0000  312.8000  331.6000  455.8535   77.0667  110.5075
   10.0000  392.0000  410.6667  567.7245   81.0667  113.3333

Time
(s)

Train
position
(ft)

Car
position
(ft)

Car-train
distance
(ft)

Car
speed
(ft/s)

Train speed
relative to
the car (ft/s)

In this problem the results (numbers) are displayed  by MATLAB  without
any text. Instructions on how to add text to output generated by MATLAB are
presented in Chapter 4.

3.9 PROBLEMS

Note:      Additional  problems  for  practicing  mathematical  operations  with  arrays
are provided at the end of Chapter 4.

1. For the function

, calculate the value of y for the following val-

ues of x using element-by-element operations:

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

.

2. For the function

, calculate the value of y for the following values of

x using element-by-element operations:

1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4

.

3.9 Problems

87

3. For  the  function

,  calculate  the  value  of  y  for
the following values of x using element-by-element operations: –2, –1.5, –1,
–0.5, 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2.

4. For the function

, calculate the value of y for the following

values of x using element-by-element operations:

15 25 35 45 55 65

.

5. The radius, r, of a sphere can be calculated from its volume, V, by:

The surface area of a sphere, S, is given by:
4 r2

=

S

Determine  the  radius  and  surface  area  of  spheres  with  volumes  of  4,000,
3,500,  3,000,  2,500,  2,000,  1,500,  and  1,000  in.3.  Display  the  results  in  a
three-column table where the values of r, V, and S are displayed in the first,
second, and third columns, respectively. The values of r and S that are dis-
played in the table should be rounded to the nearest tenth of an inch.

6. A 70 lb-bag of rice is being pulled by a per-
son  by  applying  a  force  F  at  an  angle
  as
shown. The force required to drag the bag is
given by:

=

where
0.35
(a) Determine
 for
(b) Determine the angle

 is the friction coefficient.
F
=
 where F is minimum. Do it by creating a vector

5 10 15 20 25 30

, and

35

.

with elements ranging from
for each value of
MATLAB’s built-in function max.

5

 and then find the maximum F and associated

 and spacing of 0.01. Calculate F
 with

 to

35

7. The remaining loan balance, B, of a fixed payment n years mortgage after x

years is given by:

where L is the loan amount, and r is the annual interest rate. Calculate the
balance  of  a  30-year,  $100,000  mortgage,  with  annual  interest  rate  of  6%
(use 0.06 in the equation) after 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 years. Create a
seven-element vector for x and use element-by-element operations. Display
the results in a two-row table where the values of years and balance are dis-
played in the first and second rows, respectively.

88

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

u

=

x2

8.  The  length
+

  (magnitude)  of  a  vector
z2

  is  given  by
,  determine  its
u
length by writing one MATLAB command in which the vector is multiplied
by  itself  using  element-by-element  operation  and  the  MATLAB  built-in
functions sum and sqrt are used.

.  Given  the  vector

y2

+

9.  A  unit  vector  un  in  the  direction  of  the  vector

  is  given  by

  where

  is  the  length  (magnitude)  of  the  vector,  given  by

. Given the vector

, determine the unit vec-

tor in the direction of u using the following steps:
(a) Assign the vector to a variable u.
(b) Using  element-by-element  operation  and  the  MATLAB  built-in  func-
tions sum and sqrt calculate the length of u and assign it to the vari-
able Lu.

(c) Use the variables from parts (a) and (b) to calculate un.
(d) Verify that the length of un is 1 using the same operations as in part (b).

10.  The angle between two vectors

can be determined by

 and

, where

.

Given  the  vectors
,  determine
the  angle  between  them  (in  degrees)  by  writing  one  MATLAB  command
that  uses  element-by-element  multiplication  and  the  MATLAB  built-in
functions  acosd, sum, and sqrt.

  and

11. The following vector is defined in MATLAB:
 d=[2 4 3]
By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
(a) d+d

(d) d.^2

(c) d.*d

(b) d.^d

12. The following two vectors are defined in MATLAB:
v=[3 -1 2] ,   u=[6 4 -3]

By  hand  (pencil  and  paper)  write  what  will  be  displayed  if  the  following
commands are executed by MATLAB. Check your answers by executing the
commands with MATLAB.
(a) v.*u

(b) v.^u

(c) v*u’

13. Define  the  vector

.  Then  use  the  vector  in  a  mathematical

expression to create the following vectors:
(a)

(b)

3.9 Problems

89

(c)

(d)

14. Define  the  vector

.  Then  use  the  vector  in  a  mathematical

expression to create the following vectors:

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

15. Define  x  and  y  as

the  vectors
  and
. Then use them in the following expressions to

calculate z using element-by-element calculations.

(a)

(b)

16. Define r and s as scalars

, and, t, x, and y as vectors
.  Then
use these variables to calculate the following expressions using element-by-
element calculations for the vectors.

,  and

 and

,

(a)

(b)

17. The area of a triangle ABC can be calculated
,  where  rAB  and  rAC  are  vec-
by
tors  connecting  the  vertices  A  and  B,  and  A
and C, respectively. Determine the area of the
triangle  shown  in  the  figure.  Use  the  follow-
ing steps in a script file to calculate the area.
First,  define  the  vectors  rOA,  rOB,  and  rOC
from knowing the coordinates of points A, B,
and  C.  Then  determine  the  vectors  rAB  and
rAC from rOA, rOB, and rOC. Finally, determine the area by using MATLAB’s
built-in functions cross, sum, and sqrt.

18. The cross product of two vectors can be used for
determining the angle between two vectors:

Use  MATLAB’s  built-in  functions  asind,
cross,  sqrt,  and  dot  to  find  the  angle  (in
  and
degrees)  between

. Recall that

 .

90

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

19. The center of mass,
be calculated by:

, of n particles can

,

,

where  xi,  yi,  and  zi  and  mi  are  the  coordinates
and the mass of particle i, respectively. The coordinates and mass of six par-
ticles  are  listed  in  the  following  table.  Calculate  the  center  of  mass  of  the
particles.

Particle  Mass

A
B
C
D
E
F

(kg)
0.5
0.8
0.2
1.1
0.4
0.9

Coordinate x
(mm)
-10
-18
-7
5
0
25

Coordinate y
(mm)
8
6
11
12
-8
-20

Coordinate z
(mm)
32
19
2
-9
-6
8

20. Define the vectors:

   Use the vectors to verify the identity:

,

, and

Using MATLAB’s built-in functions cross and dot, calculate the value of
the left and right sides of the identity.

21. The maximum distance s and the maximum

height h that a projectile shot at an angle
are given by:

  and

where  v0

is  the  shooting  velocity  and
m/s2.  Determine  s( )  and  h( )  for
m/s.

 if

22.  Use MATLAB to show that the sum of the infinite series

1
n2-----

n

1=

 converges

. Do this by computing the sum for:
,

to
(a)
For each part create a vector n in which the first element is 1, the increment
is 1 and the last term is 5, 50, or 5,000. Then use element-by-element calcula-

,    (b)

(c)

tions  to  create  a  vector  in  which  the  elements  are

.  Finally,  use  MAT-

3.9 Problems

91

LAB’s built-in function sum to sum the series. Compare the values to
Use format long to display the numbers.

.

23.  Use MATLAB to show that the sum of the infinite series

 converges

n

1=

to 6. Do this by computing the sum for
(a)
(c)
For each part, create a vector n in which the first element is 1, the increment
is 1 and the last term is 5, 15, or 30. Then use element-by-element calcula-

(b)

,

,

tions  to  create  a  vector  in  which  the  elements  are

.  Finally,  use  MAT-

LAB’s built-in function sum to sum the series. Use format long to display
the numbers.

24. The natural exponential function can be expressed by

. Deter-

n

0=

mine e2 by calculating the sum of the series for:
(a) n = 5,

(b) n = 15,

(c)   n = 25

For each part create a vector n in which the first element is 0, the increment
is 1, and the last term is 5, 15, or 25. Then use element-by-element calcula-

tions to create a vector in which the elements are

. Finally, use the MAT-

LAB  built-in  function  sum  to  add  the  terms  of  the  series.  Compare  the
values obtained in parts (a), (b), and (c) with the value of e2 calculated by
MATLAB.

25. Show that

. Do this by first creating a vector x that

has  the  elements
, and

,
,
. Then, create a new vector y in which each ele-

,

,

ment is determined from the elements of x by

. Compare the ele-

ments of y with the value

. Use format long to display the numbers.

26. Show that

. Do this by first creating a vector  x that has

the elements 1.0, 0.1,  0.01,  0.001,   and 0.0001. Then, create a new vector y in

which  each  element  is  determined  from  the  elements  of  x  by

.

Compare the elements of y with the value 7.5. Use format long to display
the numbers.

92

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

27. The Hazen Williams equation can be used to calculate the pressure drop, Pd

(psi/ft of pipe) in pipes due to friction:

where Q is the flow rate (gpm), C is a design coefficient determined by the
type of pipe, and  d is pipe diameter in inches. Consider a 3.5-in.-diameter
steel pipe with
. Calculate the pressure drop in a 1000-ft-long pipe
for flow rates of 250, 300, 350, 400, and 450 gpm. To carry out the calcula-
tion, first create a five-element vector with the values of the flow rates (250,
300, ...). Then use the vector in the formula using element-by-element oper-
ations.

28. The monthly lease payment, Pmt, of a new car can be calculated by:

where Pv and Fv are the present value and the future value (at the end of the
lease) of the car, respectively. N is the duration of the lease in months, and i
is the interest rate per year. Consider a 36-months-lease of a car with a pres-
ent value of $38,000 and a future value of $23,400. Calculate the monthly
payments if the yearly interest rates are 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8%. To carry out the
calculation, first create a five-element vector with the values of the interest
rates (0.03, 0.04, ...). Then use the vector in the formula using element-by-
element operations.

29.  Create the following three matrices:

,

,

(a) Calculate
tative.

A B+

 and

B A+

 to show that addition of matrices is commu-

(b) Calculate A*(B*C) and (A*B)*C to show that multiplication of matrices

is associative.

(c) Calculate  5(B+C)  and  5B+5C  to  show  that,  when  matrices  are  multi-

plied by a scalar, the multiplication is distributive.

(d) Calculate (A+B)*C and A*C+B*C to show that matrix multiplication is

distributive.

3.9 Problems

93

30. Use the matrices A, B, and C from the previous problem to answer the fol-

lowing:

(a)  Does

A B

=

B A

?

 (b)  Does (B*C)-1 = B-1*C-1?

(c)  Does

? (

t means transpose) (d)  Does (A + B)t = At + Bt?

31. Create a

 matrix A having random integer values between 1 and 5. Call
the matrix A and, using MATLAB, perform the following operations. For
each part explain the operation.

(a)  A.^A

(d)  A./A

(b)  A.*A

(e) det(A)

(c)  A*A-1

(f) inv(A)

32. The magic square is an arrangement of numbers in a square grid in such a
way that the sum of the numbers in each row, and in each column, and in
each  diagonal  is  the  same.  MATLAB  has  a  built-in  function  magic(n)
 magic
that returns an
square,  and then  test the  properties of the resulting matrix  by finding the
sum of the elements in each row, in each column and in both diagonals. In
each case, use MATLAB’s built-in function sum. (Other functions that can
be useful are diag and fliplr.)

 magic square. In a script file create a

5

5

n

n

33. Solve the following system of three linear equations:

34. Solve the following system of six linear equations:

35. A  football stadium  has  100,000  seats.  In  a  game  with  full  capacity people

with the following ticket and associated cost attended the game:

Student
$25

Alumni
$40

Faculty
$60

Public
$70

Veterans
$32

Guests
$0

Cost

Determine the number of people that attended the game in each cost cate-
gory  if  the  total  revenue  was  $4,897,000,  there  were  11,000  more  alumni
than  faculty,  the  number  of  public  plus  alumni  together  was  10  times  the
number  of  veterans,  the  number  of  faculty  plus  alumni  together  was  the

94

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

same  as  the  number  of  students,  and  the  number  of  faculty  plus  students
together  was  four  times  larger  than  the  number  of  guests  and  veterans
together.

36. A food company manufactures five types of 8-oz trail mix packages using
different  mixtures  of  peanuts,  almonds,  walnuts,  raisins,  and  M&Ms.  The
mixtures have the following compositions:

Peanuts
(oz)
3
1
1
2
1

Almonds
(oz)
1
2
1
0
2

Walnuts
(oz)
1
1
0
3
3

Raisins
(oz)
2
3
3
1
0

M&Ms
(oz)
1
1
3
2
2

Mix 1
Mix 2
Mix 3
Mix 4
Mix 5

How many packages of each mix can be manufactured if 105 lb of peanuts,
74 lb of almonds, 102 lb of walnuts, 118 lb of raisins, and 121 lb of M&Ms
are available? Write a system of linear equations and solve.

37. The  electrical  circuit  shown  consists  of
resistors and voltage sources. Determine
, using the mesh current
method  based  on  Kirchhoff’s  voltage
law (see Sample Problem 3-4).

 and

R1

V1

+
_

i1

R2

i2

R3

R4

R6

V2
+

_

i3

R7

R5

V,

 ,
,

,

V,

V

,
,

i4

+ _

V3

R8

