96

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

4.1 THE MATLAB WORKSPACE AND THE WORKSPACE WINDOW

The  MATLAB  workspace  consists  of  the  set  of  variables  (named  arrays)  that
are  defined  and  stored  during  a  MATLAB  session.  It  includes  variables  that
have been defined in the Command Window and variables defined when script
files are executed. This means that the Command Window and script files share
the same memory zone within the computer. This implies that once a variable is
in the workspace, it is recognized and can be used, and it can be reassigned new
values, in both the Command Window and script files. As will be explained in
Chapter 7 (Section 7.3), there is another type of file in MATLAB, called a func-
tion file, where variables can also be defined. These variables, however, are nor-
mally  not  shared  with  other  parts  of  the  program  since  they  use  a  separate
workspace.

Recall from Chapter 1 that the who command displays a list of the variables
currently in the workspace. The whos command displays a list of the variables
currently in the workspace and information about their size, bytes, and class. An
example is shown below.

>> 'Variables in memory'

ans =
Variables in memory

>> a = 7;

>> E = 3;

>> d = [5,  a+E,  4,  E^2]

d =
     5    10     4     9

>> g = [a, a^2,  13;  a*E,  1,  a^E]

Typing a string.

The string is assigned to ans.

Creating the variables a,
E, d, and g.

g =
      7    49     13
     21     1    343

>> who

Your variables are:
E    a    ans  d    g

The who command displays the
variables currently in the workspace.

>> whos
  Name     Size          Bytes  Class     Attributes

  E        1x1               8  double
  a        1x1               8  double
  ans      1x19             38  char
  d        1x4              32  double
  g        2x3              48  double

The whos command
displays the variables
currently in the work-
space and information
about their size and
other information.

4.2 Input to a Script File

97

The  variables  currently  in  memory  can  also  be  viewed  in  the  Workspace
Window.  This  window  can  be  opened  by  selecting  Workspace  in  the  Desktop
menu. Figure 4-1 shows the Workspace Window that corresponds to the vari-
ables defined above. The variables that are displayed in the Workspace Window

Figure 4-1: The Workspace Window.

can also be edited (changed). Double-clicking on a variable opens the Variable
Editor  Window,  where  the  content  of  the  variable  is  displayed  in  a  table.  For
example,  Figure  4-2  shows  the  Variable  Editor  Window  that  opens  when  the
variable g in Figure 4-1 is double-clicked.

Figure 4-2: The Variable Editor Window.

The elements in the Variable Editor Window can be edited. The variables in the
Workspace Window can be deleted by selecting them, and then either pressing
the delete key on the keyboard or selecting delete from the edit menu. This has
the  same  effect  as  entering  the  command  clear  variable_name  in  the
Command Window.

4.2 INPUT TO A SCRIPT FILE

When  a  script  file  is  executed,  the  variables  that  are  used  in  the  calculations
within the file must have assigned values. In other words, the variables must be
in the workspace. The assignment of a value to a variable can be done in three
ways, depending on where and how the variable is defined.

