4.2 Input to a Script File

97

The  variables  currently  in  memory  can  also  be  viewed  in  the  Workspace
Window.  This  window  can  be  opened  by  selecting  Workspace  in  the  Desktop
menu. Figure 4-1 shows the Workspace Window that corresponds to the vari-
ables defined above. The variables that are displayed in the Workspace Window

Figure 4-1: The Workspace Window.

can also be edited (changed). Double-clicking on a variable opens the Variable
Editor  Window,  where  the  content  of  the  variable  is  displayed  in  a  table.  For
example,  Figure  4-2  shows  the  Variable  Editor  Window  that  opens  when  the
variable g in Figure 4-1 is double-clicked.

Figure 4-2: The Variable Editor Window.

The elements in the Variable Editor Window can be edited. The variables in the
Workspace Window can be deleted by selecting them, and then either pressing
the delete key on the keyboard or selecting delete from the edit menu. This has
the  same  effect  as  entering  the  command  clear  variable_name  in  the
Command Window.

4.2 INPUT TO A SCRIPT FILE

When  a  script  file  is  executed,  the  variables  that  are  used  in  the  calculations
within the file must have assigned values. In other words, the variables must be
in the workspace. The assignment of a value to a variable can be done in three
ways, depending on where and how the variable is defined.

98

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

1.  The variable is defined and assigned a value in the script file.

In this case the assignment of a value to the variable is part of the script file. If
the  user  wants  to  run  the  file  with  a  different  variable  value,  the  file  must  be
edited and the assignment of the variable changed. Then, after the file is saved, it
can be executed again.

The following is an example of such a case. The script file (saved as Chap-

ter4Example2) calculates the average points scored in three games.

% The script file calculates the average points scored in three games.

% The assignment of the values of the points is part of the script file.

game1=75;

game2=93;

game3=68;

The variables are assigned
values within the script file.

ave_points=(game1+game2+game3)/3

The display in the Command Window when the script file is executed is:

>> Chapter4Example2

ave_points =
   78.6667
>>

The script file is executed by typing the name of the file.

The variable ave_points with its value
is displayed in the Command Window.

2.  The variable is defined and assigned a value in the Command Window.

In this case the assignment of a value to the variable is done in the Command
Window.  (Recall  that  the  variable  is  recognized  in  the  script  file.)  If  the  user
wants to run the script file with a different value for the variable, the new value is
assigned in the Command Window and the file is executed again.

For the previous example in which the script file has a program that calcu-
lates the average of points scored in three games, the script file (saved as Chap-
ter4Example3) is:

% The script file calculates the average points scored in three games.

% The assignment of the values of the points to the variables

% game1, game2, and game3 is done in the Command Window.

ave_points=(game1+game2+game3)/3

The Command Window for running this file is:

>> game1 = 67;
>> game2 = 90;
>> game3 = 81;

The variables are assigned values in
the Command Window.

4.2 Input to a Script File

99

>> pChater4Example3

The script file is executed.

ave_points =
   79.3333

>> game1 = 87;
>> game2 = 70;
>> game3 = 50;

The output from the script file is dis-
played in the Command Window.

New values are assigned
to the variables.

>> Chapter4Example3

The script file is executed again.

ave_points =
    69
>>

The output from the script file is dis-
played in the Command Window.

3.  The variable is defined in the script file, but a specific value is entered
in the Command Window when the script file is executed.

In this case the variable is defined in the script file, and when the file is executed,
the user is prompted to assign a value to the variable in the Command Window.
This is done by using the input command for creating the variable.

The form of the input command is:

variable_name = input(‘string with a message that
               is displayed in the Command Window’)

When the input command is executed as the script file runs, the string is dis-
played in the Command Window. The string is a message prompting the user to
enter  a  value  that  is  assigned  to  the  variable.  The  user  types  the  value  and
presses the Enter key. This assigns the value to the variable. As with any variable,
the variable and its assigned value will be displayed in the Command Window
unless a semicolon is typed at the very end of the input command. A script file
that uses the input command to enter the points scored in each game to the
program that calculates the average of the scores is shown below.

% This script file calculates the average of points scored in
three games.

% The points from each game are assigned to the variables by

% using the input command.

game1=input('Enter the points scored in the first game ');

game2=input('Enter the points scored in the second game ');

game3=input('Enter the points scored in the third game ');

ave_points=(game1+game2+game3)/3

100

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

The  following  shows  the  Command  Window  when  this  script  file  (saved  as
Chapter4Example4) is executed.

>> Chapter4Example4

Enter the points scored in the first game   67

Enter the points scored in the second game   91
Enter the points scored in the third game   70

ave_points =
    76
>>

The computer dis-
plays the message.
Then the value of
the score is typed
by the user and
the Enter key is
pressed.

In  this  example  scalars  are  assigned  to  the  variables.  In  general,  however,
vectors and arrays can also be assigned. This is done by typing the array in the
same way that it is usually assigned to a variable (left bracket, then typing row
by row, and a right bracket).

The input command can also be used to assign a string to a variable. This
can be done in one of two ways. One way is to use the command in the same
form as shown above, and when the prompt message appears the string is typed
between two single quotes in the same way that a string is assigned to a variable
without the input command. The second way is to use an option in the input
command that defines the characters that are entered as a string. The form of
the command is:

variable_name = input(‘prompt message’,‘s’)

where the ‘s’ inside the command defines the characters that will be entered as
a string. In this case when the prompt message appears, the text is typed in with-
out the single quotes, but it is assigned to the variable as a string. An example
where the input command is used with this option is included in Sample Prob-
lem 6-4.

4.3 OUTPUT COMMANDS

As  discussed  before,  MATLAB  automatically  generates  a  display  when  some
commands are executed. For example, when a variable is assigned a value, or the
name  of  a  previously  assigned  variable  is  typed  and  the  Enter  key  is  pressed,
MATLAB  displays  the  variable  and  its  value.  This  type  of  output  is  not  dis-
played if a semicolon is typed at the end of the command. In addition to this
automatic display, MATLAB has several commands that can be used to gener-
ate displays. The displays can be messages that provide information, numerical
data, and plots. Two commands that are frequently used to generate output are
disp  and  fprintf.  The  disp  command  displays  the  output  on  the  screen,
while the fprintf command can be used to display the output on the screen or
to save the output to a file. The commands can be used in the Command Win-

