112

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

Once saved, the file can be opened by any application that can read ASCII files.
For example, Figure 4-5 shows the data when the file is opened with Notepad.

Figure 4-5: Data saved in ASCII format.

Note that the file does not include the names of the variables, just the numerical
values of the variables (first A and then V) are listed.

4.4.2 The load Command

The load command can be used for retrieving variables that were saved with
the save command back to the workspace, and for importing data that was cre-
ated  with  other  applications  and  saved  in  ASCII  format  or  in  text  (.txt)  files.
Variables that were saved with the save command in .mat files can be retrieved
with the command:

load file_name

or

load(‘file_name’)

When the command is executed, all the variables in the file (with the name, type,
size, and values as were saved) are added (loaded back) to the workspace. If the
workspace  already  has  a  variable  with  the  same  name  as  a  variable  that  is
retrieved  with  the  load command, then the  variable  that  is  retrieved  replaces
the existing variable. The load command can also be used for retrieving only
some of the variables that are in the saved .mat file. For example, to retrieve two
variables named var1 and var2, the command is:

load file_name var1 var2

or

load(‘file_name’,‘var1’,‘var2’)

The load command can also be used to import data that is saved in ASCII
or text (.txt) to the workspace. This is possible, however, only if the data in the
file is in the form of a variable in MATLAB. Thus, the file can have one number
(scalar), a row or a column of numbers (vector), or rows with the same number
of numbers in each (matrix). For example, the data shown in Figure 4-5 cannot
be loaded with the load command (even though it was saved in ASCII format
with the save command), because the number of elements is not the same in all
rows. (Recall that this file was created by saving two different variables.)

4.4  The save and load Commands

113

When data is loaded from an ASCII or text file into the workspace, it has to
be assigned to a variable name. Data in ASCII format can be loaded with either
of the following two forms of the load command:

load file_name

or

VarName=load(‘file_name’)

If the data is in a text file, the extension .txt has to be added to the file name. The
form of the load command is then:

load file_name.txt

or

VarName=load(‘file_name.txt’)

In the first form of the command the data is assigned to a variable that has the
name  of  the  file.  In  the  second  form  the  data  is  assigned  to  a  variable  named
VarName.

For  example,  the  data  shown  in  Figure  4-6  (a

  matrix)  is  typed  in

Notepad, and then saved as DataFromText.txt.

Figure 4-6: Data saved as .txt file.

Next, two forms of the load command are used to import the data in the
text  file  to  the  Workspace  of  MATLAB.  In  the  first  command  the  data  is
assigned to a variable named DfT. In the second command the data is automat-
ically assigned to a variable named DataFromText, which is the name of the
text file where the data was saved.

>> DfT=load('DataFromText.txt')

DfT =
   56.0000   -4.2000
    3.0000    7.5000
   -1.6000  198.0000

>> load DataFromText.txt

>> DataFromText
DataFromText =
   56.0000   -4.2000
    3.0000    7.5000
   -1.6000  198.0000

Load the file
DataFromText and
assign the loaded data to
the variable Dft.

Use the load command with
the file DataFromText.

The data is assigned to a vari-
able named DataFromText.

Importing data to (or exporting from) other applications can also be done, with
MATLAB commands that are presented in the next section.

