118

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

4.6 EXAMPLES OF MATLAB APPLICATIONS

Sample Problem 4-1: Height and surface area of a silo

A  cylindrical  silo  with  radius  r  has  a
spherical  cap  roof  with  radius  R.  The
height  of  the  cylindrical  portion  is  H.
Write a program in a script file that deter-
mines the height H for given values of r, R,
and  the  volume  V.  In  addition,  the  pro-
gram  calculates  the  surface  area  of  the
silo.

Use  the  program  to  calculate  the  height
and surface area of a silo with r = 30 ft, R
=  45  ft,  and  a  volume  of  200,000  ft3.
Assign values for r, R, and V in the Com-
mand Window.

Solution

R

r

H

The total volume of the silo is obtained by adding the volume of the cylindrical
part and the volume of the spherical cap. The volume of the cylinder is given by

Vcyl

=

r2H

and the volume of the spherical cap is given
by:

where

,

 is calculated from

and
Using the equations above, the height, H, of
the cylindrical part can be expressed by

.

The  surface  area  of  the  silo  is  obtained  by
adding  the  surface  areas  of  the  cylindrical
part and the spherical cap.

S

=

Scyl Scap
+

=

+
2 rH 2 Rh

A program in a script file that solves the problem is presented below:

theta=asin(r/R);

h=R*(1-cos(theta));

Calculating  .
Calculating h.

4.6 Examples of MATLAB Applications

119

Vcap=pi*h^2*(3*R-h)/3;

Calculating the volume of the cap.

H=(V-Vcap)/(pi*r^2);

S=2*pi*(r*H + R*h);

Calculating H.

Calculating  the  surface  area

fprintf('The height H is: %f ft.',H)

fprintf('\nThe surface area of the silo is: %f square ft.',S)

The Command Window where the script file, named silo, was executed is:

>> r=30; R=45; V=200000;

>> silo

Assigning values to r, R, and V.
Running  the  script  file  named

The height H is: 64.727400 ft.

The surface area of the silo is: 15440.777753 square ft.

Sample Problem 4-2: Centroid of a composite area

R 60

Write a program in a script file that cal-
culates the coordinates of the centroid of
a composite area. (A composite area can
easily  be  divided  into  sections  whose
centroids are known.) The user needs to
divide  the  area  into  sections  and  know
the  coordinates  of  the  centroid  (two
numbers)  and  the  area  of  each  section
(one  number).  When  the  script  file  is
executed,  it  asks  the  user  to  enter  the
three numbers as a row in a matrix. The
user  enters  as  many  rows  as  there  are
sections. A section that represents a hole
is taken to have a negative area. For out-
put, the program displays the coordinates of the centroid of the composite area.
Use the program to calculate the centroid of the area shown in the figure.

Dimensions in mm

200

150

200

100

50

40

20

50

30

50

Solution

The area is divided into six sections as shown in the following figure. The total
area  is  calculated  by  adding  the  three  sections  on  the  left  and  subtracting  the
three sections on the right. The location and coordinates of the centroid of each
section are marked in the figure, as well as the area of each section.

The coordinates

 and

 of the centroid of the total area are given by

and
each section, respectively.

, where

,

, and A are the coordinates of the centroid and area of

A script file with a program for calculating the coordinates of the centroid

120

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

of a composite area is provided below.

% The program calculates the coordinates of the centroid

% of a composite area.

clear C xs ys As

C=input('Enter  a  matrix  in  which  each  row  has  three  ele-
ments.\nIn  each  row  enter  the  x  and  y  coordinates  of  the
centroid and the area of a section.\n');

xs=C(:,1)';

ys=C(:,2)';

As=C(:,3)';

A=sum(As);

x=sum(As.*xs)/A;

y=sum(As.*ys)/A;

Creating a row vector for the x coordinate
of each section (first column of C).

Creating a row vector for the y coordinate
of each section (second column of C).

Creating a row vector for the area of
each section (third column of C).

Calculating the total area.

Calculating the coordinates of the
centroid of the composite area.

fprintf('The  coordinates  of  the  centroid  are:  (  %f,  %f
)\n',x,y)

The script file was saved with the name Centroid. The following shows the Com-
mand Window where the script file was executed.

>> Centroid

Enter a matrix in which each row has three elements.

In  each  row  enter  the  x  and  y  coordinates  of  the  centroid
and the area of a section.

4.6 Examples of MATLAB Applications

121

[100 100 200*200
60-80/pi 200+80/pi pi*60^2/4
60+140/3 220 140*60/2
200/(3*pi) 100 -pi*50^2/2
105 145 -50*50
150 95 -40*150]

Entering the data for matrix C.
Each row has three elements: the
x, y, and A of a section.

The coordinates of the centroid are: ( 85.387547 , 131.211809 )

Sample Problem 4-3: Voltage divider

When several resistors are connected in an electrical circuit in series, the voltage
across each of them is given by the voltage divider rule:

where vn and Rn are the voltage across resistor n and its resistance, respectively,
  is  the  equivalent  resistance,  and  vs  is  the  source  voltage.  The  power

dissipated in each resistor is given by:

The figure below shows a circuit with seven resistors connected in series.

R1

R2

R3

vs

+
_

R4

R7

R6

R5

Write a program in a script file that calculates the voltage across each resistor,
and the power dissipated in each resistor, in a circuit that has resistors connected
in series. When the script file is executed, it requests that the user first enter the
source voltage and then to enter the resistances of the resistors in a vector. The
program displays a table with the resistance listed in the first column, the volt-
age  across  the  resistor  in  the  second  column,  and  the  power  dissipated  in  the
resistor in the third column. Following the table, the program displays the cur-
rent in the circuit and the total power.

Execute the file and enter the following data for vs and the R’s.
,
R3
24=
8=
10=

V,
..

12=

14=

18=

20=

R1

R4

R2

R5

,

,

,

vs
R7

,

R6

15=

,

122

Solution

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

A script file that solves the problem is shown below.

% The program calculates the voltage across each resistor

% in a circuit that has resistors connected in series.

vs=input('Please enter the source voltage ');

Rn=input('Enter the values of the resistors as elements in a
row vector\n');

Req=sum(Rn);

vn=Rn*vs/Req;

Pn=Rn*vs^2/Req^2;

i = vs/Req;

Ptotal = vs*i;

Calculate the equivalent resistance.

Apply the voltage divider rule.
Calculate the power in each resistor.
Calculate the current in the circuit.
Calculate the total power in the circuit.

Table = [Rn', vn', Pn'];

disp(' ')

Create a variable table with the
vectors Rn, vn, and Pn as columns.

disp(' Resistance Voltage   Power')

disp('    (Ohms)    (Volts)   (Watts)')

Display headings for
the columns.

disp(' ')

disp(Table)

disp(' ')

Display an empty line.

Display the variable Table.

fprintf('The current in the circuit is %f Amps.',i)

fprintf('\nThe  total  power  dissipated  in  the  circuit  is  %f
Watts.',Ptotal)

The Command Window where the script file was executed is:

>> VoltageDivider

Name of the script file.

Please enter the source voltage 24

Voltage entered by the user.
Enter the value of the resistors as elements in a row vector

[20  14  12  18  8  15  10]

Resistor values entered as a vector.

  Resistance  Voltage    Power

     (Ohms)    (Volts)   (Watts)

   20.0000      4.9485    1.2244

   14.0000      3.4639    0.8571

   12.0000      2.9691    0.7346

   18.0000      4.4536    1.1019

    8.0000      1.9794    0.4897

