4.7 Problems

123

   15.0000      3.7113    0.9183

   10.0000      2.4742    0.6122

The current in the circuit is 0.247423 Amps.

The total power dissipated in the circuit is 5.938144 Watts.

4.7 PROBLEMS

Solve the following problems by first writing a program in a script file and then
executing the program.

1. Body mass index (BMI) of a person is a measure of body fat based on height

and weight. In U.S. customary units it is calculated by:

where  W  is  the  person’s  weight  in  pounds  and  h  is  the  heights  in  inches.
Write  a  MATLAB  program  in  a  script  file  that  calculates  the  BMI.  For
input the program asks the user to enter his/her weight and height. The pro-
gram then calculates the BMI rounded to the nearest tenth. For output the
program displays the message: “The BMI is: XX.” where XX is the value of
the BMI. Determine the BMI of a 68-in.-tall person that weigh162 lb.

2. The altitude, h, as a function of air pressure can be calculated by:

where h is in units of feet and the pressure p in units of millibars (mb). Write
a MATLAB program in a script file that calculates the h for a given p. For
input the program asks the user to enter the pressure in units of millibars.
The program then calculates the altitude rounded to the nearest integer. For
output  the  program  displays  the  message:  “The  altitude  is:  XX  ft.”  where
XX is the calculated value of h. Determine the altitude if the pressure is 394
mb.

3. Write a MATLAB program that determines the radius,
r,  of  the  largest  sphere  that  can  be  inscribed  inside  a
cone  with  base  radius  R  and  height  h.  For  input  the
program asks the user to enter values for R and h. The
program then calculates r rounded to the nearest tenth.
For  output  the  program  displays  the  message:  “The
radius of the largest sphere that can be inscribed inside
a cone with a base radius of XX in. and height of XX
in., is: XX in.” where XX are the corresponding numerical values. Use the

R

h

r

124

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

program to determine r for a cone with

in. and

 in.

4. Radioactive decay can be modeled by the equation

where A is the amount at time t, A0 is the amount at time
, and k is a
constant. Write a MATLAB program that calculates the amount of a radio-
active material. When executed, the program asks the user to enter the half-
life of the material (in years), the current amount of the material (in lb), and
the number of years t from now for which the amount should be calculated.
From this information the program first calculates the constant k and then
the amount at t years. For output the program displays the message: “The
amount of the material after XX years is XX kg” where XX are the corre-
sponding numerical values. Use the program to determine how much pluto-
nium-239 (half-life 24,110 years) will be left from 50 lb after 500 years.

5. A fuel tank is made of a half cylinder (

in.)
as shown. Derive an expression for the amount of
fuel in gallons as a function of h. Create a vector
for h ranging from 0 to 14 in. with increments of
2  in.  Then  calculate  the  corresponding  volume
rounded to the nearest tenth of a gallon. Display
the  results  in  a  two-column  table  where  in  the
first column are the values of h and in the second column the associated val-
ues of volume (in gallons).

36 in

h

r

6. A  300-lb  garage  door  is  being  opened  by
pulling on the cable as shown. As the door
is lifted the force, F, in the cable, as a func-
tion of the angle  , is given by:

where

Calculate  F  for    =0°  through  90°  with
increments of 10°. Display the results in a two-column table.

7. Write a MATLAB program in a script file that calculates  the  average and
the standard deviation of a list of grades as well as the number of grades on
the list. The program asks the user (input command) to enter the grades as
elements  of  a  vector.  The  program  then  calculates  the  required  quantities
using MATLAB’s built-in functions length, mean, and std. The results
are displayed in the Command Window in the following format:
“There are XX grades.” where XX is the numerical value.

4.7 Problems

125

“The average grade is XX.” where XX is the numerical value rounded to the
nearest tenth.
“The standard deviation is XX.” where XX is the numerical value rounded
to the nearest tenth.

Execute the program and enter the following grades: 93, 77, 51, 62, 99,

41, 82, 77, 71, 68, 100, 46, 78, 80, and 83.

8. The reduction of the amount of medication in the body can be modeled by
 , where A is the amount at time t, A0 is the amount at
the equation
t  =  0,  and  k  is  the  decay  constant  (
).  The  half-life  time  of  a  certain
medication is 3.5 h. A person takes 400 mg of the medication at t=0, and
then additional 400 mg every 4 h. Determine the amount of the medication
in a patient’s body 23 h after taking the first dose.

After determining the value of k, define a vector

(the time since taking each dose) and calculate the corresponding values of
A.  Then  use  MATLAB’s  built-in  function  sum  to  determine  the  total
amount.

9. The value of a saving account, V, after t years is given by:

where P is the initial investment, r is the yearly interest rate in % (e.g., 7.5%
entered  as  7.5),  and  n  is  the  number  of  times  per  year  that  the  interest  is
compounded. Write a MATLAB program in a script file that calculates V.
When the program is executed, it asks the user to enter the amount of the
initial investment, the number of years, the interest rate, and the number of
times per year that the interest is compounded. The output is displayed in
the following format: “The value of a $XX investment at a yearly interest
rate  of  X.X%  compounded  X  times  per  year,  after  XX  years  is
$XXXX.XX”, where XXX stands for the corresponding quantities. Use the
program to determine the value of a $20,000 investment after 18 years if the
yearly interest rate is 3.5% compounded 6 times a year.

10. The  electricity  supply  cables  of  the  three
houses  shown  are  connected  to  a  pole  as
shown. Write a MATLAB program that deter-
mines the location of the pole (distance x) that
minimizes  the  total  length  of  the  cables
needed. In the program define a vector x with
values ranging from 50 to 200 with increments
of  0.1.  Use  this  vector  to  calculate  the  corre-
sponding values of total length of the cables. Then use MATLAB’s built-in
function min to find the value of x that corresponds to the shortest length
of cables.

210 ft

80 ft

80 ft

x

126

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

11. Early  explorers  often  estimated  altitude  by  measuring  the  temperature  of
boiling water. Use the following two equations to make a table that modern-
day hikers could use for the same purpose.

,

Tb

=

49.161

pln

+

44.932

where p is atmospheric pressure in inches of mercury,
 is boiling tempera-
ture in °F, and h is altitude in feet. The table should have two columns, the
first altitude and the second boiling temperature. The altitude should range
between –500 ft and 10,000 ft at increments of 500 ft.

Tb

2 in.

12. An  isosceles  triangle  sign  is  designed  to  have  a
triangular printed area of 600 in.2 (shaded area
with a base length of a and height of h in the fig-
ure). As shown in the figure, there is a 2-in. gap
between the sides of the triangles. Write a MAT-
LAB program that determine the dimensions  a
and h such that the overall area of the sign will
be as small as possible. In the program define a
vector a with values ranging from 10 to 120 with
increments of 0.1. Use this vector for calculating
the  corresponding  values  of  h  and  the  overall  area  of  the  sign.  Then  use
MATLAB’s  built-in  function  min  to  find  the  dimensions  of  the  smallest
sign.

2 in.

a

h

2 in.

13. The angle

 at which a viewer sees
the  picture  on  the  screen  in  a
movie theater depends on the dis-
tance  x  from  the  screen.  Write  a
MATLAB  program  that  deter-
mines the angle
 (in degrees) for
viewers setting at distances of 20, 26, 32, 38, 44, 50, 56, 62, and 68 ft. Dis-
play the results in a two-column table.

14. A  12-ft  (144-in.)  wire  is  cut  into  eight  pieces
which are welded together to form a pyramid
as  shown,  such  that  in  the  rectangular  base
.  Write  a  MATLAB  program  that
determines  the  dimensions  a  and  b  such  that
the volume of the pyramid will be as large as
possible. In the program define a vector a with
values  ranging  from  4  to  14  in.  with  incre-
ments of 0.01 in. Use this vector for calculat-
ing  the  corresponding  values  of  b,  h  and  the
volume. Then use MATLAB’s built-in function max to find the dimensions
of a and b that correspond to the pyramid with the largest volume.

h

a

b

4.7 Problems

127

x

A

C

10,000 ft

15. A  person  at  point  A  spots  a  child  in
trouble  at  point  B  across  the  river.  The
person can run at a speed of 8.6 ft/s and
can swim at a speed of 3.9 ft/s. In order
to reach the child in the shortest time the
person  runs  to  point  C  and  then  swims
to  point  B,  as  shown.  Write  a  MATLAB  program  that  determines  the
distance x to point C that minimizes the time the person can reach the child.
In the program define a vector x with values ranging from 0 to 5,000 with
increments  of  1.  Use  this  vector  to  calculate  the  corresponding  values  of
x.Then  use  MATLAB’s  built-in  function  min  to  find  the  value  of  x  that
corresponds to the shortest time.

3,000 ft

B

16. The  maximum  stress  max  at  the  edge
of  a  hole  (diameter  d)  in  a  thin  plate,
with  width  w  and  thickness  t,  loaded
by  a  tensile  force  F  as  shown  is  given
by:

F

d

w

where

 and

F

t

.

Write  a  program  in  a  script  file  that  calculates  max.  The  program  should
read the values of F, w, d, and t from an ASCII text file using the load com-
mand. The output should be in the form of a paragraph combining text and
numbers— i.e., something like: “The maximum stress in a plate with a width
of XX in. and thickness of XX in. and a hole of XX in. in diameter, due to a
tensile force of XXX lb is XXXX psi, where XX stands for numerical val-
ues.” The stress should be rounded to the nearest integer. Use the program
to  calculate  max  when
in.,  and
in.,

in.,

lb.

17. The  airplane  shown  is  flying  at  a  constant
speed of
 mi/h along a straight path as
shown.  The  airplane  is  being  tracked  by  a
radar station positioned a distance
ft
below  point  A.  The  airplane  is at point  A  at
. Write a MATLAB program that calcu-
  and  r  as  functions  of  time  for
s.  Display  the  results  in  a

lates

three-column table where the first column is t, the second is the angle
degrees, and the third is the corresponding value of r.

 in

128

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

18. The  intrinsic electrical conductivity

 of a  semiconductor can be approxi-

mated by:

where

  is  measured  in

,

Eg

  is  the  band  gap  energy,  k  is  Boltz-

=

C

13.83

 and

  eV/K),  and  T  is  temperature  in  kelvins.  For
mann’s  constant  (
germanium,
eV. Write a program in a script file
Eg
0.67
=
that calculates the intrinsic electrical conductivity for germanium for vari-
ous temperatures. The values of the temperature should be read from an xls
spreadsheet using the xlsread command. The output should be presented
as a table where the first column is the temperature and the second column
is the intrinsic electrical conductivity. Use the following values for tempera-
ture: 400, 435, 475, 500, 520, and 545 K.

19. The pressure drop  p in pascals (Pa) for a
fluid  flowing  in  a  pipe  with  a  sudden
increase in diameter is given by:

v

d

D

 is the density of the fluid, v, the velocity of the flow, and d and D are
where
defined in the figure. Write a program in a script file that calculates the pres-
sure drop  p. When the script file is executed, it requests the user to input
the density in kg/m3, the velocity in m/s, and values of the nondimensional
 and v
ratio
followed by a table with the values of
 in the first column and the cor-
responding values of  p in the second column.

 as a vector. The program displays the inputted values of

Execute  the  program  assuming  flow  of  gasoline  (
m/s  and  the  following  ratios  of  diameters

5=

v

=

737

kg/m3)  at

.

20. The net heat exchange by radiation from plate 1
with  radius  b  to  plate  2  with  radius  a  that  are
separated by a distance c is given by:

T2

 and

where

 are the absolute temperatures
T1
  W/(m2-K4)  is the
of the plates,
  is  a
Stefan-Boltzmann  constant,  and
shape factor which, for the arrangement in the
figure, is given by:

a

b

c

4.7 Problems

129

,

, and

. Write a script file that cal-
where
culates  the  heat  exchange  q.  For  input  the  program  asks  the  user  to  enter
values for
, a, b, and c. For output the program prints a summary of
the geometry and temperatures and then prints the value of q. Use the script
to calculate the results for
m, and
K,
c

, 1, and 10 m.

,
T1 T2

0.1=

1=

2=

m,

K,

600

400

T2

T1

=

=

b

a

21. The  equation  of  a  circle  in  a  plane  with  radius  R  and  a  center  at  point

 is given by:

The equation can also be written in the form:

     Given the coordinates of three points

 it is
possible to determine the radius and the coordinates of the center of the cir-
cle  that  passes  through  the  three  points.  This  is  done  by  substituting  the
coordinate of each of the points in the equation and solving the system of
, and c.
three linear equations for

, and

,

 where
,

Write  a  program  in  a  script  file  that  calculates  the  coordinates  of  the
center  and  the  radius  of  a  circle  that  passes  through  three  given  points.
When  executed  the  program  asks  the  user  to  enter  the  coordinates  of  the
three points. The program then calculates the center and radius and displays
the results in the following format: “The coordinates of the center are (xx.x,
xx.x) and the radius is xx.x.”, where xx.x stands for the calculated quantities
rounded  to  the  nearest  tenth.  Execute  the  program  entering  the  following
three points: (11.5, 5), (3.2, 8.6), and (–4.5, –6.8).

22. A  truss  is  a  structure  made  of  mem-
bers joined at their ends. For the truss
shown  in  the  figure,  the  forces  in  the
11 members are determined by solving
the following system of 11 equations:
,

,

800 lb

36 ft

1

3

2

6

4

5

7

1200 lb

30 ft

42 ft

11

8

9

10

400 lb
48 ft

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

Write  the  equations  in  matrix  form  and  use  MATLAB  to  determine  the
forces in the members. A positive force means tensile force and a negative
force means compressive force. Display the results in a table where the first
column  displays  the  member  number  and  the  second  column  displays  the
corresponding force.

130

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

23. A truss is a structure made of mem-
bers  joined  at  their  ends.  For  the
truss shown in the figure, the forces
in  the  seven  members  are  deter-
mined by solving the following sys-
tem of seven equations.

,

,

,

13 m

1

3

2

5

4

3000 lb

6

7

8000 N
16 m

6000 N
16 m

16 m

,

Write  the  equations  in  matrix  form  and  use  MATLAB  to  determine  the
forces in the members. A positive force means tensile force and a negative
force means compressive force. Display the results in a table where the first
column  displays  the  member  number  and  the  second  column  displays  the
corresponding force.

24. The graph of the function

 passes through the points
(–1.2, 18.8), (0.2, 5), (2, 16), and (3.5, 15). Determine the constants a, b, c, and
d.  (Write  a  system  of  four  equations  with  four  unknowns,  and  use  MAT-
LAB to solve the equations.)

25. The graph of the function

  passes through the
points (–2.5, –62), (–1.5, –7.2), (–0.5, 8.3), (1, 3.7), and (3, 45.7). Determine the
constants  a,  b,  c,  d,  and  e.  (Write  a  system  of  five  equations  with  four
unknowns, and use MATLAB to solve the equations.)

26. The  surface  of  many  airfoils  can  be
described with an equation of the form

where t is the maximum thickness as a fraction of the chord length c (e.g.,
m,  the  following  values  for  y
t
tmax
have been measured for a particular airfoil:

).  Given  that

m  and

0.2=

ct=

1=

c

x (m)

 y (m)

0.15

0.35

0.5

0.7

0.85

0.08909

0.09914

0.08823

0.06107

0.03421

Determine the constants
,
tions and five unknowns, and use MATLAB to solve the equations.)

. (Write a system of five equa-

a0 a1 a2 a3
,

, and

a4

,

4.7 Problems

131

27. During a golf match, a certain number of points are awarded for each eagle
and a different number for each birdie. No points are awarded for par, and
a  certain  number  of  points  are  deducted  for  each  bogey  and  a  different
number deducted for each double bogey (or worse). The newspaper report
of an important match neglected to mention what these point values were,
but did provide the following table of the results:

Golfer

Eagles Birdies

Pars

Bogeys Doubles Points

A

B

C

D

1

2

1

1

2

3

4

3

10

11

10

10

1

0

1

2

1

1

0

0

5

12

11

8

From  the  information  in  the  table  write  four  equations  in  terms  of  four
unknowns. Solve the equations for the unknown points awarded for eagles
and birdies and points deducted for bogeys and double bogeys.

28. The dissolution of copper sulfide in aqueous nitric acid is described by the

following chemical equation:

a

b

,

,

,

f=

e=

d=

where  the  coefficients  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  and  g  are  the  numbers  of  the  various
molecules  participating  in  the  reaction  and  are  unknown.  The  unknown
coefficients  are  determined  by  balancing  each  atom  on  left  and  right  and
then balancing the ionic charge. The resulting equations are:
f
a
=
+ +
There  are  seven  unknowns  and  only  six  equations.  A  solution  can  still  be
obtained, however, by taking advantage of the fact that all the coefficients
must  be  positive  integers.  Add  a  seventh  equation  by  guessing
  and
solve the system of equations. The solution is valid if all the coefficients are
 and repeat the solution.
positive integers. If this is not the case, take
Continue  the  process  until  all  the  coefficients  in  the  solution  are  positive
integers.

2g=

2=

1=

,

3b

4e

,

a

g

a

c

29. The heat index HI, calculated from the air temperature and relative humid-
ity, is the apparent temperature felt by the body. An equation used by the
National Weather Service for calculating the HI is given by:

where T is the temperature in °F, and R is the relative humidity in integer
percentage. Write a MATLAB program in a script file that displays the fol-
lowing chart of heat index for given air temperature and relative humidity in

132

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

the Command Window:

                             Temperature (F)

           80     82     84     86     88     90     92     94
  Relative

  Humidity

    (%)

     50    81     83     85     88     91     95     99    103

     55    81     84     86     89     93     97    101    106

     60    82     84     88     91     95    100    105    110

     65    82     85     89     93     98    103    108    114

     70    83     86     90     95    100    106    112    119

     75    84     88     92     97    103    109    116    124

30. The  stress  intensity  factor  K  at  a  crack  is  given  by

  where

 is the far-field  stress,  a is  the  crack
length, and C is a parameter that depends on the geome-
try of  the specimen and  crack.  For  the case  of  the edge
crack shown in the figure, C is given by:

Write a script file that will print out a table of values with
the  ratio  a/b  in  the  first  column  and  the  corresponding
parameter  C  in  the  second  column.  Let  a/b  range
between 0.05 and 0.80 with increments of 0.05.

