5.1 The plot Command

5.1.2 Plot of a Function

139

In many situations there is a need to plot a given function. This can be done in
MATLAB  by  using  the  plot  or  the  fplot  command.  The  use  of  the  plot
command is explained below. The fplot command is explained in detail in the
next section.

y

In  order  to  plot  a  function

  with  the  plot  command,  the  user
needs to first create a vector of values of x for the domain over which the func-
tion will be plotted. Then a vector y is created with the corresponding values of
  by  using  element-by-element  calculations  (see  Chapter  3).  Once  the  two
f x
vectors are defined, they can be used in the plot command.

f x=

As  an  example,  the  plot  command  is  used  to  plot  the  function

 for

. A program that plots this function is shown in

the following script file.

%  A script file that creates a plot of

%  the function: 3.5.^(-0.5*x).*cos(6x)

x=[-2:0.01:4];

Create vector x with the domain of the function.

y=3.5.^(-0.5*x).*cos(6*x);

plot(x,y)

Create vector y with the func-
tion value at each x.

Plot y as a function of x.

Once the script file is executed, the plot is created in the Figure Window, as
shown in Figure 5-4. Since the plot is made up of segments of straight lines that
connect the points, to obtain an accurate plot of a function, the spacing between
the elements of the vector x must be appropriate. Smaller spacing is needed for a

Figure 5-4:  The Figure Window with a plot of the function

.

