5.10 Putting Multiple Plots on the Same Page

157

For  example,  a  plot  of  the  function

r

=

3

cos2

0.5

+

  for

  is

shown below.

t=linspace(0,2*pi,200);
r=3*cos(0.5*t).^2+t;
polar(t,r)

5.10 PUTTING MULTIPLE PLOTS ON THE SAME PAGE

Multiple plots can be created on the same page with the subplot command,
which has the form:

subplot(m,n,p)

m n

(3,2,2)

(3,2,1)

m n

m n

The  command  divides  the  Figure  Window
(and the page when printed) into
 rectan-
gular  subplots.  The  subplots  are  arranged  like
elements in an
 matrix where each element
is a subplot. The subplots are numbered from 1
through
.  The  upper  left  subplot  is  num-
bered 1, and the lower right subplot is numbered
m n
.  The  numbers  increase  from  left  to  right
within a row, from the first row to the last. The
command  subplot(m,n,p)  makes  the  sub-
plot  p  current.  This  means  that  the  next  plot
command  (and  any  formatting  commands)  will
create a plot (with the corresponding format) in this subplot. For example, the
command subplot(3,2,1) creates six areas arranged in three rows and two
columns  as  shown,  and  makes  the  upper  left  subplot  current.  An  example  of
using the subplot command is shown in the solution of Sample Problem 5-2.

(3,2,5)

(3,2,6)

(3,2,3)

(3,2,4)

5.11 MULTIPLE FIGURE WINDOWS

When plot or any other command that generates a plot is executed, the Figure
Window opens (if not already open) and displays the plot. MATLAB labels the
Figure Window as Figure 1 (see the top left corner of the Figure Window that is
displayed in Figure 5-4). If the Figure Window is already open when the plot
or any other command that generates a plot is executed, a new plot is displayed
in  the  Figure  Window  (replacing  the  existing  plot).  Commands  that  format

158

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

plots are applied to the plot in the Figure Window that is open.

It is possible, however, to open additional Figure Windows and have several
of them open (with plots) at the same time. This is done by typing the command
figure. Every time the command figure is entered, MATLAB opens a new
Figure  Window.  If  a  command  that  creates  a  plot  is  entered  after  a  figure
command,  MATLAB  generates  and  displays  the  new  plot  in  the  last  Figure
Window that was opened, which is called the active or current window. MAT-
LAB labels the new Figure Windows successively; i.e., Figure 2, Figure 3, and so
on. For example, after the following three commands are entered, the two Fig-
ure Windows that are shown in Figure 5-12 are displayed.

>> fplot(@ (x) x.*cos(x),[0,10])

>> figure

>> fplot(@ (x) exp(-0.2*x).*cos(x),[0,10])

Plot displayed in Figure 1 window.
Figure 2 window opens.
Plot displayed in Figure 2 window.

Figure 5-12: Two open Figure Windows.

The figure command can also have an input argument that is a number
(integer), of the form figure(n). The number corresponds to the number of
the  corresponding  Figure  Window.  When  the  command  is  executed,  window
number  n  becomes  the  active  Figure  Window  (if  a  Figure  Window  with  this
number  does  not  exist,  a  new  window  with  this  number  opens).  When  com-
mands that create new plots are executed, the plots that they generate are dis-
played  in  the  active  Figure  Window.  In  the  same  way,  commands  that  format
plots are applied to the plot in the active window. The figure(n) command
provides means for having a program in a script file that opens and makes plots
in a few defined Figure Windows. (If several figure commands are used in a
program instead, new Figure Windows will open every time the script file is exe-
cuted.)

Figure Windows can be closed with the close command. Several forms of

the command are:
close  closes the active Figure Window.
close(n)  closes the nth Figure Window.
close all  closes all Figure Windows that are open.

