134

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

PLOT TITLE

LEGEND

Y AXIS
LABEL

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

)
x
u
l
(

I

Y
T
S
N
E
T
N

I

Light Intensity as a Function of Distance

Theory
Experiment

Comparison between theory and experiment.

TEXT
LABEL

MARKER

0

8

10

12

14

16
DISTANCE (cm)

18

20

22

24

X AXIS LABEL

Figure 5-1: Example of a formatted two-dimensional plot.

5.1 THE plot COMMAND

The plot command is used to create two-dimensional plots. The simplest form
of the command is:

plot(x,y)

Vector

Vector

The arguments x and y are each a vector (one-dimensional array). The two vec-
tors must have the same number of elements. When the plot command is exe-
cuted, a figure is created in the Figure Window. If not already open, the Figure
Window opens automatically when the command is executed. The figure has a
single curve with the x values on the abscissa (horizontal axis) and the y values
on the ordinate (vertical axis). The curve is constructed of straight-line segments
that  connect  the  points  whose  coordinates  are  defined  by  the  elements  of  the
vectors x and y. Each of the vectors, of course, can have any name. The vector
that is typed first in the plot command is used for the horizontal axis, and the
vector  that  is  typed  second  is  used  for  the  vertical  axis.  If  only  one  vector  is
entered as an input argument in the plot command (for example  plot(y))
than  the  figure  will  show  a  plot  of  the  values  of  the  elements  of  the  vector
(
y 1 y 2 y 3

,
The figure that is created has axes with a linear scale and default range. For
example, if a vector x has the elements 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 7.5, 8, 10, and a vector y has

) versus the element number (

,
1 2 3

).

,

,

,

,

5.1 The plot Command

135

the elements 2, 6.5, 7, 7, 5.5, 4, 6, 8, a simple plot of y versus x can be created by
typing the following in the Command Window:

>> x=[1.1  1.8  3.2  5.5  7  7.5  8  10];

>> y=[2  6.5  7  7  5.5  4  6  8];

>> plot(x,y)

Once the plot command is executed, the Figure Window opens and the plot is
displayed, as shown in Figure 5-2.

Figure 5-2: The Figure Window with a simple plot.

The plot appears on the screen in blue, which is the default line color.

The plot command has additional, optional arguments that can be used to
specify the color and style of the line and the color and type of markers, if any
are desired. With these options the command has the form:

plot(x,y,‘line specifiers’,‘PropertyName’,PropertyValue)

Vector Vector

(Optional)  Specifiers  that
define  the  type  and  color
of the line and markers.

(Optional)  Properties  with
values  that  can  be  used  to
specify  the  line  width,  and
a  marker’s  size  and  edge,
and fill colors.

Line Specifiers:

Line specifiers are optional and can be used to define the style and color of the
line and the type of markers (if markers are desired). The line style specifiers are:

Line Style

Specifier

Line Style

Specifier

solid (default)

dashed

-

--

dotted

dash-dot

:

-.

136

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

The line color specifiers are:

Line Color
red
green
blue
cyan

Specifier
r
g
b
c

Line Color
magenta
yellow
black
white

Specifier
m
y
k
w

The marker type specifiers are:

Marker Type
plus sign
circle
asterisk
point
cross
triangle (pointed up)
triangle (pointed
down)

Specifier
+
o
*
.
x
^
v

Marker Type
square
diamond
five-pointed star
six-pointed star
triangle (pointed left)
triangle (pointed right)

Specifier
s
d
p
h
<
>

Notes about using the specifiers:

• The specifiers are typed inside the plot command as strings.

• Within the string the specifiers can be typed in any order.

• The specifiers are optional. This means that none, one, two, or all three types

can be included in a command.

Some examples:

plot(x,y)

A  blue  solid  line  connects  the  points  with  no  markers
(default).
A red solid line connects the points.

plot(x,y,‘r’)
plot(x,y,‘--y’) A yellow dashed line connects the points.
plot(x,y,‘*’)

The  points  are  marked  with  *  (no  line  between  the
points).

plot(x,y,‘g:d’) A green dotted line connects the points that are marked

Property Name and Property Value:

with diamond markers.

Properties are optional and can be used to specify the thickness of the line, the
size of the marker, and the colors of the marker’s edge line and fill. The Property
Name is typed as a string, followed by a comma and a value for the property, all
inside the plot command.

5.1 The plot Command

137

Four properties and their possible values are:

Property name

Description

Possible property
values

LineWidth
(or linewidth)

MarkerSize
(or markersize)

MarkerEdgeColor
(or
markeredgecolor)

MarkerFaceColor
(or
markerfacecolor)

Specifies the width of the
line.

A  number  in  units  of
points (default 0.5).

Specifies  the  size  of  the
marker.

A  number  in  units  of
points.

Specifies the color of the
marker,  or  the  color  of
the  edge  line  for  filled
markers.

Specifies the color of the
filling for filled markers.

Color  specifiers  from
the  table  above,  typed
as a string.

Color  specifiers  from
the  table  above,  typed
as a string.

For example, the command

plot(x,y,‘-mo’,‘LineWidth’,2,‘markersize’,12,
      ‘MarkerEdgeColor’,‘g’,‘markerfacecolor’,‘y’)

creates a plot that connects the points with a magenta solid line and circles as
markers at the points. The line width is 2 points and the size of the circle mark-
ers is 12 points. The markers have a green edge line and yellow filling.

A note about line specifiers and properties:

The three line specifiers, which indicate the style and color of the line, and the
type of the marker can also be assigned with a PropertyName argument fol-
lowed by a PropertyValue argument. The Property Names for the line speci-
fiers are:

Specifier

Property Name

Line style

linestyle
(or LineStyle)

Line color

color (or Color)

Marker

marker (or Marker)

Possible property values

Line style specifier from the
table above, typed as a string.

Color specifier from the table
above, typed as a string.

Marker specifier from the
table above, typed as a string.

As with any command, the plot command can be typed in the Command
Window, or it can be included in a script file. It also can be used in a function
file (explained in Chapter 7). It should also be remembered that before the plot
command  can  be  executed,  the  vectors  x  and  y  must  have  assigned  elements.

138

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

This can be done, as was explained in Chapter 2, by entering values directly, by
using commands, or as the result of mathematical operations. The next two sub-
sections show examples of creating simple plots.

5.1.1 Plot of Given Data

In this case given data is used to create vectors that are then used in the plot
command. The following table contains sales data of a company from 1988 to
1994.

Year

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

Sales
 (millions)

8

12

20

22

18

24

27

To plot this data, the list of years is assigned to one vector (named yr), and
the corresponding sales data is assigned to a second vector (named sle). The
Command  Window  where  the  vectors  are  created  and  the  plot  command  is
used is shown below:

>> yr=[1988:1:1994];

>> sle=[8  12  20  22  18  24  27];

>> plot(yr,sle,'--r*','linewidth',2,'markersize',12)

>>

Line Specifiers:
dashed red line and
asterisk marker.

Property Name and Property Value:
the line width is 2 points and the
marker size is 12 points.

Once  the  plot  command  is  executed,  the  Figure  Window  with  the  plot,  as
shown in Figure 5-3, opens. The plot appears on the screen in red.

Figure 5-3: The Figure Window with a plot of the sales data.

5.1 The plot Command

5.1.2 Plot of a Function

139

In many situations there is a need to plot a given function. This can be done in
MATLAB  by  using  the  plot  or  the  fplot  command.  The  use  of  the  plot
command is explained below. The fplot command is explained in detail in the
next section.

y

In  order  to  plot  a  function

  with  the  plot  command,  the  user
needs to first create a vector of values of x for the domain over which the func-
tion will be plotted. Then a vector y is created with the corresponding values of
  by  using  element-by-element  calculations  (see  Chapter  3).  Once  the  two
f x
vectors are defined, they can be used in the plot command.

f x=

As  an  example,  the  plot  command  is  used  to  plot  the  function

 for

. A program that plots this function is shown in

the following script file.

%  A script file that creates a plot of

%  the function: 3.5.^(-0.5*x).*cos(6x)

x=[-2:0.01:4];

Create vector x with the domain of the function.

y=3.5.^(-0.5*x).*cos(6*x);

plot(x,y)

Create vector y with the func-
tion value at each x.

Plot y as a function of x.

Once the script file is executed, the plot is created in the Figure Window, as
shown in Figure 5-4. Since the plot is made up of segments of straight lines that
connect the points, to obtain an accurate plot of a function, the spacing between
the elements of the vector x must be appropriate. Smaller spacing is needed for a

Figure 5-4:  The Figure Window with a plot of the function

.

