140

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

function that changes rapidly. In the last example a small spacing of 0.01 pro-
duced the plot that is shown in Figure 5-4. However, if the same function in the
same domain is plotted with much larger spacing—for example, 0.3—the plot
that is obtained, shown in Figure 5-5, gives a distorted picture of the function.

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-2

 x=[-2:0.3:4];
 y=3.5.^(-0.5*x).*cos(6*x);
 plot(x,y)

-1

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 5-5: A plot of the function

 with large spacing.

Note also that in Figure 5-4 the plot is shown with the Figure Window, while in
Figure 5-5 only the plot is shown. The plot can be copied from the Figure Win-
dow (in the Edit menu, select Copy Figure) and then pasted into other applica-
tions.

5.2 THE fplot COMMAND

The fplot command plots a function with the form
fied limits. The command has the form:

y

f x=

 between speci-

fplot(function,limits,‘line specifiers’)

The function
to be plotted.

The domain of x
typed as two-element
vector.

Specifiers that define the
type and color of the line
and markers (optional).

‘function’:    The  function  should  be  typed  in  the  form  of  an  anonymous
function (covered in detail in Section 7.8). The form of an anonymous function
is:  @  (x)  f(x).  For  example,  if  the  function
  is  to  be
plotted, it is typed as: @ (x) 8*x.^2+5*cos(x). The functions can include
MATLAB built-in functions and functions that are created by the user (covered
in Chapter 7).

8x2

cos

f x

+

=

x

5

• The  function  should  be  typed  using  element-by-element  operations,  and  can
include previously defined variables. For example, in the function above it is pos-

