150

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

x=linspace(0.1,60,1000);
y=2.^(-0.2*x+10);
plot(x,y)

x=linspace(0.1,60,1000);
y=2.^(-0.2*x+10);
semilogy(x,y)

Linear

x=linspace(0.1,60,1000);
y=2.^(-0.2*x+10);
semilogx(x,y)

g
o
L

g
o
L

Linear

x=linspace(0.1,60,1000);
y=2.^(-0.2*x+10);
loglog(x,y)

r
a
e
n
L

i

r
a
e
n
L

i

Log

Log

Figure 5-9: Plots of

 with linear, semilog, and log-log scales.

Notes for plots with logarithmic axes:

• The  number  zero  cannot  be  plotted  on  a  log  scale  (since  a  log  of  zero  is  not

defined).

• Negative numbers cannot be plotted on log scales (since a log of a negative num-

ber is not defined).

5.6 PLOTS WITH ERROR BARS

Experimental data that is measured and then displayed in plots frequently con-
tains  error  and  scatter.  Even  data  that  is  generated  by  computational  models
includes error or uncertainty that depends on the accuracy of the input parame-
ters and the assumptions in the mathematical models that are used. One method
of plotting data that displays the error, or uncertainty, is by using error bars. An
error  bar  is  typically  a  short  vertical  line  that  is  attached  to  a  data  point  in  a
plot. It shows the magnitude of the error that is associated with the value that is
displayed by the data point. For example, Figure 5-10 shows a plot with error
bars for the experimental data from Figure 5-1.

5.6 Plots with Error Bars

151

1000

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

)
x
u
l
(

I

Y
T
S
N
E
T
N

I

100

8

10

12

14

16
DISTANCE (cm)

18

20

22

24

Figure 5-10: A plot with error bars.

Plots with error bars can be done in MATLAB with the errorbar com-
mand. Two forms of the command, one for making plots with symmetric error
bars (with respect to the value of the data point) and the other for nonsymmet-
ric  error  bars  at  each  point,  are  presented.  When  the  error  is  symmetric,  the
error bar extends the same length above and below the data point, and the com-
mand has the form:

errorbar(x,y,e)

Vectors with horizontal and ver-
tical coordinates of each point.

Vector with the value of the
error at each point.

• The lengths of the three vectors x, y, and e must be the same.

• The length of the error bar is twice the value of e. At each point the error bar

extends from y(i)-e(i) to y(i)+e(i).

The plot in Figure 5-10, which has symmetric error bars, was done by exe-

cuting the following code:

xd=[10:2:22];

yd=[950 640 460 340 250 180 140];

ydErr=[30 20 18 35 20 30 10]

errorbar(xd,yd,ydErr)

xlabel('DISTANCE (cm)')
ylabel('INTENSITY (lux)')

The command for making a plot with error bars that are not symmetric is:

errorbar(x,y,d,u)

Vectors with horizontal and
vertical coordinates of each
point.

Vector with the upper-
bound value of the
error at each point.

Vector with the lower-
bound value of the
error at each point.

