6.2 Conditional Statements

187

in which the commands are  executed. The first  line is an  if statement  with a
conditional  expression.  If  the  conditional  expression  is  true,  the  program  exe-
cutes group 1 of commands between the if and the else statements and then
skips to the end. If the conditional expression is false, the program skips to the
else and then executes group 2 of commands between the else and the end.

6.2.3 The if-elseif-else-end Structure

The  if-elseif-else-end  structure  is  shown  in  Figure  6-3.  The  figure
shows how the commands are typed in the program, and gives a flowchart that
illustrates the flow, or the sequence, in which the commands are executed. This
structure  includes  two  conditional  statements  (if  and  elseif)  that  make  it
possible to select one out of three groups of commands for execution. The first
line is an if statement with a conditional expression. If the conditional expres-
sion is true, the program executes group 1 of commands between the if and the

Flowchart

False

if
statement

......
......

MATLAB program.

if conditional expression

........
........
........

Group 1 of
MATLAB commands.

elseif conditional expression

False

elseif
statement

True

Commands
group 1

else

True

Commands
group 3

Commands
group 2

........
........
........

........
........
........

Group 2 of
MATLAB commands.

Group 3 of
MATLAB commands.

end

end
......
......

MATLAB program.

Figure 6-3: The structure of the if-elseif-else-end conditional statement.

elseif statements and then skips to the end. If the conditional expression in
the  if  statement  is  false,  the  program  skips  to  the  elseif  statement.  If  the
conditional  expression in the  elseif statement is true,  the  program executes
group 2 of commands between the elseif and the else and then skips to the
end.  If  the  conditional  expression  in  the  elseif  statement  is  false,  the  pro-
gram skips to the else and executes group 3 of commands between the else
and the end.

It should be pointed out here that several elseif statements and associ-

188

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

ated  groups  of  commands  can  be  added.  In  this  way  more  conditions  can  be
included. Also, the else statement is optional. This means that in the case of
several  elseif  statements  and  no  else  statement,  if  any  of  the  conditional
statements is true the associated commands are executed; otherwise nothing is
executed.

The following example uses the if-elseif-else-end structure in a pro-

gram.

Sample Problem 6-3: Water level in water tower

The  tank  in  a water  tower has the geometry
shown in the figure (the lower part is a cylin-
der and the upper part is an inverted frustum
of a cone). Inside the tank there is a float that
indicates the level of the water. Write a MAT-
LAB program that determines the volume of
the  water  in  the  tank  from  the  position
(height h) of the float. The program asks the
user to enter a value of h in m, and as output
displays the volume of the water in m3.

Solution

For
with height h:
For
inder with

h

m  the  volume  of  the  water  is  given  by  the  volume  of  a  cylinder
V
m the volume of the water is given by adding the volume of a cyl-

12.52h

=

.

19=

m, and the volume of the water in the cone:

where

.

The program is:

%  The  program  calculates  the  volume  of  the  water  in  the
water tower.

h=input('Please enter the height of the float in meter  ');

if h > 33

   disp('ERROR. The height cannot be larger than 33 m.')

elseif h < 0
   disp('ERROR. The height cannot be a negative number.')

elseif h <= 19
   v = pi*12.5^2*h;

   fprintf('The volume of the water is %7.3f cubic meter.\n',v)

