202

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

A =
     1     2     3     4     5
     2     4     7    11    16
     3     7    14    25    41
     4    11    25    50    91

6.6 THE break AND continue COMMANDS

The break command:

• When inside a loop (for or while), the break command terminates the exe-
cution  of  the  loop  (the  whole  loop,  not  just  the  last  pass).  When  the  break
command appears in a loop, MATLAB jumps to the end command of the loop
and continues with the next command (it does not go back to the for command
of that loop).

•

If the break command is inside a nested loop, only the nested loop is termi-
nated.

• When a break command appears outside a loop in a script or function file, it

terminates the execution of the file.

• The break command is usually used within a conditional statement. In loops it
provides a method to terminate the looping process if some condition is met —
for example, if the number of loops exceeds a predetermined value, or an error in
some numerical procedure is smaller than a predetermined value. When typed
outside a loop, the break command provides a means to terminate the execu-
tion of a file, such as when data transferred into a function file is not consistent
with what is expected.

The continue command:

• The continue command can be used inside a loop (for or while) to stop

the present pass and start the next pass in the looping process.

• The continue command is usually a part of a conditional statement. When
MATLAB reaches the continue command, it does not execute the remaining
commands  in  the  loop,  but  skips  to  the  end  command  of  the  loop  and  then
starts a new pass.

