6.8 Problems

211

The two plots generated by the program are shown below. One plot shows the
result with
  F. It can be observed that
with a larger capacitor the DC voltage is smoother (smaller ripple in the wave).

  F and the other with

10=

45=

C

C

15

10

5

0

-5

)

V

(

e
g
a
t
l
o
V

-10

-15

0

15

10

5

0

-5

)

V

(

e
g
a
t
l
o
V

-10

-15

0

C

45=

  F

C

10=

  F

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

Time (s)

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

Time (s)

6.8 PROBLEMS

1. Evaluate  the  following  expressions  without  using  MATLAB.  Check  the

answers with MATLAB.
(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

2. Given:

,

,

.  Evaluate  the  following  expressions  without

using MATLAB. Check the answers with MATLAB.
(a)
(c)

(b)
(d)

3. Given: v = [–2  4  1  0  2  1  2 ] and w = [2  5  0  1  2  –1  3 ]. Evaluate the follow-
ing  expressions  without  using  MATLAB.  Check  the  answers  with  MAT-
LAB.
(a) ~v ==~w
(c) v > ~ –1*w

(b) w > = v
(d) v >  –1*w

212

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

4. Use the vectors v and w from Problem 3. Use relational operators to create a
vector u that is made up of the elements of v that are smaller than or equal
to the elements of w.

5. Evaluate  the  following  expressions  without  using  MATLAB.  Check  the

answers with MATLAB.
(a) 0|7&9&–3
(c) ~4<5|0>=12/6

(b) 7>6&~0<=2
(d) – 7<–5<–2&2+3<=15/3

6. Use loops to create a

 matrix in which the value of each element is two
times its row number minus three times its column number. For example, the
value of element (2,5) is

.

7. Write a program that generates a vector with 30 random integers between
–20 and 20 and then finds the sum of all the elements that are divisible by 3.

8. Write a program that asks the user to input a vector of integers of arbitrary
length. Then,  using  a for-end loop the program  examines each element of
the vector. If the element is positive, its value is doubled. If the element is
negative,  its  value  is  tripled.  The  program  displays  the  vector  that  was
entered and the modified vector. Execute the program, and when the pro-
gram ask the user to input a vector type randi([-10  20],1,19). This
creates a 19-element vector with random integers between –10 and 20.

9. Write a program that asks the user to input a vector of integers of arbitrary
length. Then, using a for-end loop the program eliminates all the negative
elements. The program displays the vector that was entered and the modi-
fied  vector,  and  a  message  that  says  how  many  elements  were  eliminated.
Execute the program and when the program ask the user to input a vector
type  randi([-15  20],1,25).  This  creates  a  25-element  vector  with
random integers between –15 and 20.

10. The daily high temperature (°F) in New York City and Denver, Colorado,
during the month of January 2014 is given in the vectors below (data from
the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration).
NYC = [33  33  18  29  40  55  19  22  32  37  58  54  51  52  45  41  45  39  36
45  33  18  19  19  28  34  44  21  23  30  39]
DEN = [39  48  61  39  14  37  43  38  46  39  55  46  46  39  54  45  52  52  62
45  62  40  25  57  60  57  20  32  50  48  28]
where the elements in the vectors are in the order of the days in the month.
Write a program in a script file that determines and displays the following
information:
(a) The  average  temperature  for  the  month  in  each  city  (rounded  to  the

nearest degree).

6.8 Problems

213

(b) The number of days that the temperature was above the average in each

city.

(c) The number of days that the temperature in Denver was higher than the

temperature in New York.

11. The  Pascal  triangle  can  be  displayed  as  elements  in  a
lower-triangular  matrix  as  shown  on  the  right.  Write  a
MATLAB  program  that  creates  a
  matrix  that  dis-
plays n rows of Pascal’s triangle. Use the program to create
4 and 7 rows Pascal’s triangles. (One way to calculate the
value of the elements in the lower portion of the matrix is

.)

1 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 0 0 0 0
1 2 1 0 0 0
1 3 3 1 0 0
1 4 6 4 1 0
1 5 10 10 5 1

12. Fibonacci  numbers  are the  numbers in a sequence  in which  the  first  three
elements are 0, 1, and 1, and the value of each subsequent element is the sum
of the previous three elements:

0, 1, 1, 2, 4, 7, 13, 24, ...
Write a MATLAB program in a script file that determines and displays the
first 25 Fibonacci numbers.

13. The reciprocal Fibonacci constant

 is defined by the infinite sum:

=

n

1=

Fn

where
 are the Fibonacci numbers  1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, ... . Each element in
this sequence of numbers is the sum of the previous two. Start by setting the
first two elements equal to 1, then
. Write a MATLAB pro-
 for a given n. Execute the program for
gram in a script file that calculates
n

and 100.

10 50,

=

,

14. The value of

 can be estimated from:

n

0=

 for a given n. Run the pro-
Write a program (using a loop) that determines
gram with n = 10, n = 100, and n = 1,000. Compare the result with pi. (Use
format long.)

15. The value of

 can be estimated from the expression:

Write a MATLAB program in a script file that determine
 for any number
of terms. The program asks the user to enter the number of terms, and then

214

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

calculates  the  corresponding  value  of
and 40 terms. Compare the result with pi. (Use format long.)

.  Execute  the  program  with  5,  10,

16. Write a program that (a) generates a vector with 20 random integer elements
with integers between 10 and 30, (b) replaces all the elements that are not
even integers with random integers between 10 and 30, and (c) repeats (b)
until all the elements are even integers. The program should also count how
many times (b) is repeated before all the elements are even integers. When
done, the program displays the vector and a statement that states how many
iterations were needed for generating the vector.

17. A vector is given by x = [9  –1.5  13.4  13.3  –2.1  4.6  1.1  5  –6.1  10  0.2].
Using  conditional  statements  and  loops,  write  a  program  that  rearranges
the elements of x in order from the smallest to the largest. Do not use MAT-
LAB’s built-in function sort.

18. The Pythagorean theorem states that

. Write a MATLAB pro-
gram in a script file that finds all the combinations of triples a, b, and c that
are positive integers all smaller or equal to 50 that satisfy the Pythagorean
theorem. Display the results in a three-column table in which every row cor-
responds to one triple. The first three rows of the table are:

c2=

b2+

a2

3    4    5
5  12  13
6    8  10

19. Write  a  MATLAB  program  in  a  script  file  that  finds  and  displays  all  the
numbers between 100 and 999 whose product of digits is 6 times the sum of
]. Use a for-end loop in the pro-
the digits. [e.g. 347 since
gram. The loop should start from 100 and end at 999.

 where p is
20. A safe prime is a prime number that can be written in the form
 and 23
also a prime number. For example, 47 is a safe prime since
is also a prime number. Write a computer program that finds and displays all the
safe  primes  between  1  and  1,000.  Do  not  use  MATLAB’s  built-in  function
isprime.

21. Sexy primes are two prime numbers that the difference between them is 6. For
example,  23  and  29  are  sexy  primes  since
.  Write  a  computer  pro-
gram that finds all the sexy primes between 1 and 300. The numbers should be
displayed in a two-column matrix where each row displays one pair. Do not use
MATLAB’s built-in function isprime.

6.8 Problems

215

22. A Mersenne prime is a prime number that is equal to

, where n is an inte-

ger.  For  example,  31  is  a  Mersenne  prime  since
.  Write  a  computer
program that finds all the Mersenne primes between 1 and 10,000. Do not use
MATLAB’s built-in function isprime.

23. A perfect number is a positive integer that is equal to the sum of its positive divi-
sors except the number itself. The first two perfect numbers are 6 and 28 since
. Write a computer program that finds the

 and
first four perfect numbers.

24. A list of exam scores (S) (in percent out of 100%) is given: 72, 81, 44, 68, 90,

53, 80, 75, 74, 65, 50, 92, 85, 69, 41, 73, 70, 86, 61, 65, 79, 94, 69.
Write  a  computer  program  that  calculates  the  average  (Av)  and  standard
deviation (Sd) of the scores, which are rounded to the nearest integer. Then,
the program determines the letter grade of each of the scores according to
the following scheme:

Score (%)

Letter grade
Score (%)

Letter grade
Score (%)

Letter grade

A

C

F

B

D

The program displays the values of Av and Sd followed by a list that shows
the scores and the corresponding letter grade (e.g., 72% Letter grade C).

25. The Taylor series expansion for ax is:

n

0=
Write  a  MATLAB  program  that  determines  ax  using  the  Taylor  series
expansion. The program asks the user to type a value for x. Use a loop for
adding the terms of the Taylor series. If cn is the nth term in the series, then
the  sum  Sn  of  the  n  terms  is
.  In  each  pass  calculate  the  esti-

mated error E given by

. Stop adding terms when

.

The program displays the value of ax. Use the program to calculate:
(a)    23.5
Compare the values with those obtained by using a calculator.

(b)   6.31.7

216

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

26. Write a MATLAB program in a script file that finds a positive integer n such
that the sum of all the integers
 is a number between 100
+ + +
2
and 1,000 whose three digits are identical. As output, the program displays
the integer n and the corresponding sum.

+

3

n

1

27. The following are formulas for calculating the training heart rate (THR):

where MHR is the maximum heart rate given by (https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Heart_rate):

For males:

, for females:

,

RHR is the resting heart rate, and INTEN the fitness level (0.55 for low, 0.65
for medium, and 0.8 for high fitness). Write a program in a script file that
determines the THR. The program asks users to enter their gender (male or
female),  age  (number),  resting  heart  rate  (number),  and  fitness  level  (low,
medium,  or  high).  The  program  then  displays  the  training  heart  rate
(rounded to the nearest integer). Use the program for determining the train-
ing heart rate for the following two individuals:
(a) A 19-year-old male, resting heart rate of 64, and medium fitness level.
(b) A 20-year-old female, resting heart rate of 63, and high fitness level.

28. Body mass index (BMI) is a measure of obesity. In standard units, it is cal-

culated by the formula

where W is weight in pounds, and H is height in inches. The obesity classifi-
cation is:

BMI

Classification

Below 18.5

Underweight

18.5 to 24.9

Normal

25 to 29.9

Overweight

30 and above

Obese

Write a program in a script file that calculates the BMI of a person. The pro-
gram  asks  the  person  to  enter  his  or  her  weight  (lb)  and  height  (in.).  The
program  displays  the  result  in  a  sentence  that  reads:  “Your  BMI  value  is
XXX, which classifies you as SSSS,” where XXX is the BMI value rounded
to the nearest tenth, and SSSS is the corresponding classification. Use the
program for determining the obesity of the following two individuals:
(a) A person 6 ft 2 in. tall with a weight of 180 lb.
(b) A person 5 ft 1 in. tall with a weight of 150 lb.

6.8 Problems

217

29. Write  a  program  in  a  script  file  that  calculates  the  cost  of  renting  a  car

according to the following price schedule:

Duration of rent

Sedan

SUV

Daily
rate

Free
miles
(per day)

Cost of
additional
mile

Daily
rate

Free
miles
(per day)

Cost of
additional
mile

1-6 days

7-29 days

30 or more days

$79

$69

$59

80

100

120

$0.69

$0.59

$0.49

$84

$74

$64

80

100

120

$0.74

$0.64

$0.54

The program asks the user to enter the type of car (sedan or SUV), the num-
ber of days, and the number of miles driven. The program then displays the
cost (rounded to cents) for the rent. Run the program three times for the fol-
lowing cases:
(a) Sedan, 10 days, 769 miles.   (b)  SUV, 32 days, 4,056 miles.
(c) Sedan, 3 days, 511 miles.

30. Write a program that determines the change given back to a customer in a
self-service checkout machine of a supermarket for purchases of up to $50.
The program generates a random number between 0.01 and 50.00 and dis-
plays the number as the amount to be paid. The program then asks the user
to enter payment, which can be one $1 bill, one $5 bill, one $10 bill, one $20
bill, or one $50 bill. If the payment is less than the amount to be paid, an
error message is displayed. If the payment is sufficient, the program calcu-
lates the change and lists the bills and/or the coins that make up the change,
which has to be composed of the least number each of bills and coins. For
example, if the amount to be paid is $2.33 and a $10 bill is entered as pay-
ment, then the change is one $5 bill, two $1 bills, two quarters, one dime,
one nickel, and two pennies. Execute the program three times.

31. The concentration of a drug in the body

CP

 can be modeled by the equation:

 is the dosage administered (mg),
Vd
DG
 is the absorption rate constant (h–1),

 is the volume of distribution
where
 is the elimination rate con-
(L),
ke
ka
stant (h–1), and t is the time (h) since the drug was administered. For a cer-
L,
tain  drug,  the  following  quantities  are  given:
ke
ka
0.4=
(a) A single dose is administered at

. Calculate and plot

h–1, and

 versus t

1.6=

50=

mg,

h–1.

0=

DG

150

Vd

=

t

CP

for 10 h.

(b) A first dose is administered at

t

0=

, and subsequently four more doses

218

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

are administered at intervals of 4 h (i.e., at
and plot

 versus t for 24 h.

CP

t

=

4 8 12 16

,

,

,

). Calculate

32. One numerical method for calculating the cubic root of a number,
ley’s method. The solution process starts by choosing a value
mate  of  the  solution.  Using  this  value,  a  second,  more  accurate  value

 is Hal-
 as a first esti-
  is

x1

P3

x2

calculated with
third, still more accurate value

x3

, which is then used for calculating a
, and so on. The general equation for calculat-

1+

xi

  from  the  value  of

ing  the  value  of
.
Write a MATLAB program that calculates the cubic root of a number. In the
 for the first estimate of the solution. Then, by using the
program use
general equation in a loop, calculate new, more accurate values. Stop the looping

P=

  is

x1

xi

when  the  estimated  relative  error  E  defined  by

  is  smaller  than

0.00001. Use the program to calculate:

(a)

3

800

(b)

3

59071

(c)

33. Write a program in a script file that converts a measure of area given in units
of either m2, cm2, in2, ft2, yd2, or acre to the equivalent quantity in different
units specified by the user. The program asks the user to enter a numerical
value for the size of an area, its current units, and the desired new units. The
output is the size of the area in the new units. Use the program to:
(a) Convert 55 in.2 to cm2.
(c) Convert 300 cm2 to yd2.

(b) Convert 2400 ft2 to m2.

34. In a one-dimensional random walk, the position x of a walker is computed

by:

xj

=
where s is a random number. Write a program that calculates the number of
. Use MATLAB’s
steps required for the walker to reach a boundary
built-in  function  randn(1,1)  to  calculate  s.  Run  the  program  100  times
(by using a loop) and calculate the average number of steps when

10=

s+

xj

B

.

35. The Sierpinski triangle can be implemented in MATLAB by plotting points
iteratively according to one of the following three rules that are selected ran-
domly with equal probability.
,
Rule 1:

=

=

0.5xn

yn

1+

0.5yn

xn

1+

Rule 2:

=

1+

+

0.25

,

xn
xn

0.5xn
0.5xn

=

Rule 3:
1+
Write a program in a script file that calculates the x and y vectors and then
plots  y  versus  x  as  individual  points  [use  plot(x,y,‘^’)].  Start  with

0.5yn

0.5+

,

yn

1+

=

6.8 Problems

219

0=

 and

x1
10,000 iterations.

y1

0=

. Run the program four times with 10, 100, 1,000, and

36. The  roots  of  a  cubic  equation
using the following procedure:
,
Set:

, and

.

Calculate:

,

  can  be  calculated

where
If
If

 and
 the equation has complex roots.
 all roots are real and at least two are equal. The roots are given by:

.

,

, and

.

If

 all roots are real and are given by:

,

, and

.

, where
Write a MATLAB program that determines the real roots of a cubic equa-
tion. As input the program asks the user to enter the values of a3, a2, a1, and
a0 as a vector. The program then calculates the value of D. If the equations
have complex roots, the message “The equation has complex roots” is dis-
played. Otherwise the real roots are calculated and displayed. Use the pro-
gram to solve the following equations:
(a)
(c)

(b)

37. The overall grade in a course is determined from the grades of 10 homework
assignments, 2 midterms, and a final exam, using the following scheme:
Homework: Homework assignments are graded on a scale from 0 to 80. The
grade of the two lowest assignments is dropped and the average of the eight
assignments with the higher grades constitutes 20% of the course grade.
Midterms and final exam: Midterms and final exams are graded on a scale
from  0  to  100.  If  the  average  of  the  midterm  scores  is  higher  than,  or  the
same as, the score on the final exam, the average of the midterms constitutes
40% of the course grade and the grade of the final exam constitutes 40% of
the course grade. If the final exam grade is higher than the average of the
midterms, the average of the midterms constitutes 30% of the course grade
and the grade of the final exam constitutes 50% of the course grade.

Write a computer program in a script file that determines the course
grade for a student. The program first asks the user to enter the 10 home-
work assignment grades (in a vector), two midterm grades (in a vector), and
the grade of the final. Then the program calculates a numerical course grade
(a number between 0 and 100). Execute the program for the following cases:
(a) Homework assignment grades: 65, 79, 80, 50, 71, 73, 61, 70, 69, 74. Mid-

220

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

term grades: 83, 91. Final exam: 84.

(b) Homework  assignment  grades:  70,  69,  83,  45,  90,  89,  52,  78,  100,  87.

Midterm grades: 87, 72. Final exam: 90.

38. A  Keith  number  is  a  number  (integer)  that  appears  in  a  Fibonacci-like
sequence that is based on its own decimal digits. For two-decimal digit num-
bers (10 through 99) a Fibonacci-like sequence is created in which the first
element is the tens digit and the second element is the units digit. The value
of each subsequent element is the sum of the previous two elements. If the
number is a Keith number, then it appears in the sequence. For example, the
first  two-decimal  digit  Keith  number  is  14,  since  the  corresponding  Fibo-
nacci-like sequence is 1, 4, 5, 9, 14. Write a MATLAB program that deter-
mines and displays all the Keith numbers between 10 and 99.

39. The  following  MATLAB  commands  create  a  sine-shaped  signal  y(t)  that

contains random noise:
t = 0:.05:10;
y = sin(t)-0.1+0.2*rand(1,length(t));

Write  a  MATLAB  program  that  uses  these  commands  to  create  a  noisy
sine-shaped signal. Then the program smooths the signal by using the three-
points  moving-average  method.  In  this  method  the  value  of  every  point  i,
except the first and last, is replaced by the average of the value of three adja-
cent  points  (i–1,  i,  and  i+1).  Make  a  plot  that  display  the  noisy  and
smoothed signals.

