240

Chapter 7: User-Defined Functions and Function Files

% Output argument is:
% xyout: The values of x and y at x=a, x=(a+b)/2, and x=b
% listed in a 3 by 2 matrix.

x=linspace(a,b,100);

y=feval(Fun,x);

Using the imported function to calculate f(x) at 100 points.

xyout(1,1)=a; xyout(2,1)=(a+b)/2; xyout(3,1)=b;

xyout(1,2)=y(1);

xyout(2,2)=feval(Fun,(a+b)/2);

xyout(3,2)=y(100);

plot(x,y)

xlabel('x'), ylabel('y')

Using the imported function to
calculate f(x) at the midpoint.

Passing a user-defined function into another function by using a string expression:

The following demonstrates how to pass a user-defined function into a function
function by typing the name of the imported function as a string in the input

argument.  The  function
  from  Section  7.9.1,  cre-
ated  as  a  user-defined  function  named  Fdemo,  is  passed  into  the  user-defined
function  funplotS.  Note  that  the  name  Fdemo  is  typed  in  a  string  for  the
input argument Fun in the user-defined function funplotS.

>> ydemoS=funplotS('Fdemo',0.5,4)

ydemoS =
    0.5000   -2.9852
    2.2500   -3.5548
    4.0000    0.6235

The name of the imported
function is typed as a string.

In  addition  to  the  display of  the  numerical output  in  the  Command  Window,
the plot shown in Figure 7-3 is displayed in the Figure Window.

7.10 SUBFUNCTIONS

A function file can contain more than one user-defined function. The functions
are typed one after the other. Each function begins with a function definition
line. The first function is called the primary function and the rest of the func-
tions are called subfunctions. The subfunctions can be typed in any order. The
name of the function file that is saved should correspond to the name of the pri-
mary function. Each of the functions in the file can call any of the other func-
tions in the file. Outside functions, or programs (script files), can call only the
primary function. Each of the functions in the file has its own workspace, which
means that in each the variables are local. In other words, the primary function
and the subfunctions cannot access each other’s variables (unless variables are

7.10 Subfunctions

declared to be global).

241

Subfunctions  can  help  in  writing  user-defined  functions  in  an  organized
manner. The program in the primary function can be divided into smaller tasks,
each of which is carried out in a subfunction. This is demonstrated in Sample
Problem 7-4.

Sample Problem 7-4: Average and standard deviation

Write a user-defined function that calculates the average and the standard devia-
tion of a list of numbers. Use the function to calculate the average and the stan-
dard deviation of the following list of grades:
80  75  91  60  79  89  65  80  95  50  81

Solution

The average

xave

 (mean) of a given set of n numbers

x1 x2
,

,

,

xn

 is given by:

The standard deviation is given by:

A  user-defined  function,  named  stat,  is  written  for  solving  the  problem.  To
demonstrate the use of subfunctions, the function file includes  stat as a pri-
mary function, and two subfunctions called AVG and StandDiv. The function
.  The  subfunc-
AVG  calculates
tions  are  called  by  the  primary  function.The  following  listing  is  saved  as  one
function file called stat.

,  and  the  function  StandDiv  calculates

xave

function [me SD] = stat(v)

The primary function.

n=length(v);

me=AVG(v,n);

SD=StandDiv(v,me,n);

function av=AVG(x,num)

av=sum(x)/num;

Subfunction.

function Sdiv=StandDiv(x,xAve,num)

Subfunction.

xdif=x-xAve;

xdif2=xdif.^2;

Sdiv= sqrt(sum(xdif2)/(num-1));

The user-defined function stat is then used in the Command Window for cal-
culating the average and the standard deviation of the grades:

