7.12 Examples of MATLAB Applications

245

7.12 EXAMPLES OF MATLAB APPLICATIONS

Sample Problem 7-5: Exponential growth and decay

A model for exponential growth or decay of a quantity is given by

A t

=

A0ekt

A t

where
constant unique to the specific application.

 and

A0

 are the quantity at time t and time 0, respectively, and k is a

Write  a  user-defined  function  that  uses  this  model  to  predict  the  quantity
 at time t from knowledge of
. For func-
 and
A t
tion name and arguments, use At = expGD(A0,At1,t1,t), where the output
argument  At  corresponds
input  arguments,  use
to
A0,At1,t1,t, corresponding to

 at some other time

, and t, respectively.

A t
,
A0 A t1

,  and
,
t1

A t1

for

A0

t1

Use the function file in the Command Window for the following two cases:
(a) The population of Mexico was 67 million in the year 1980 and 79 million in

1986. Estimate the population in 2000.

(b) The half-life of a radioactive material is 5.8 years. How much of a 7-gram

sample will be left after 30 years?

Solution

To  use  the  exponential  growth  model,  the  value  of  the  constant  k  has  to  be
determined first by solving for k in terms of

, and

:

,
A0 A t1

t1

Once k is known, the model can be used to estimate the population at any time.

The user-defined function that solves the problem is:

function At=expGD(A0,At1,t1,t)

Function definition line.

% expGD calculates exponential growth and decay

% Input arguments are:

% A0: Quantity at time zero.

% At1: Quantity at time t1.

% t1: The time t1.

% t: time t.

% Output argument is:

% At: Quantity at time t.

k=log(At1/A0)/t1;

At=A0*exp(k*t);

Determination of k.

Determination of A(t).
(Assignment of value to output variable.)

246

Chapter 7: User-Defined Functions and Function Files

Once the function is saved, it is used in the Command Window to solve the two
cases. For case a)
,

, and

79=

20=

67=

6=

,

t

:

A t1

A0

t1

>> expGD(67,79,6,20)
ans =
        116.03

Estimation of the population in the year 2000.

A0

7=

For case b)
 corresponds to the half-life, which is
the  time  required  for  the  material  to  decay  to  half  of  its  initial  quantity),
t1

 (since

, and

5.8=

3.5=

A t1

30=

t1

,

t

.

>> expGD(7,3.5,5.8,30)
ans =
          0.19

The amount of material after 30 years.

Sample Problem 7-6: Motion of a projectile

Create  a  function  file  that  calculates  the
trajectory of a projectile. The inputs to the
function  are  the  initial  velocity  and  the
angle  at  which  the  projectile  is  fired.  The
outputs  from  the  function  are  the  maxi-
mum height and distance. In addition, the
function generates a plot of the trajectory.
Use the function to calculate the trajectory of a projectile that is fired at a veloc-
ity of 230 m/s at an angle of 39°.

Solution

The motion of a projectile can be analyzed by considering the horizontal and
 can be resolved into horizontal and
vertical components. The initial velocity
vertical components

v0

v0x

=

v0 cos

    and

v0y

=

v0 sin

In the vertical direction the velocity and position of the projectile are given by:

  and

The time it takes the projectile to reach the highest point
sponding height are given by:

vy

0=

 and the corre-

  and

The total flying time is twice the time it takes the projectile to reach the highest
point,
. In the horizontal direction the velocity is constant, and the
position of the projectile is given by:

2thmax

ttot

=

x

=

v0xt

7.12 Examples of MATLAB Applications

247

In  MATLAB  notation  the  function  name  and  arguments  are  entered  as
[hmax,dmax] = trajectory(v0,theta). The function file is:

function [hmax,dmax]=trajectory(v0,theta)

Function definition line.
%  trajectory  calculates  the  max  height  and  distance  of  a
projectile, and makes a plot of the trajectory.

% Input arguments are:

% v0: initial velocity in (m/s).

% theta: angle in degrees.

% Output arguments are:

% hmax: maximum height in (m).

% dmax: maximum distance in (m).

% The function creates also a plot of the trajectory.

g=9.81;

v0x=v0*cos(theta*pi/180);

v0y=v0*sin(theta*pi/180);

thmax=v0y/g;

hmax=v0y^2/(2*g);

ttot=2*thmax;

dmax=v0x*ttot;

% Creating a trajectory plot

tplot=linspace(0,ttot,200);

Creating a time vector with 200 elements.

x=v0x*tplot;

y=v0y*tplot-0.5*g*tplot.^2;

Calculating the x and y coordi-
nates of the projectile at each time.

plot(x,y)

xlabel('DISTANCE (m)')

ylabel('HEIGHT (m)')

Note the element-by-element multiplication.

title('PROJECTILE''S TRAJECTORY')

After the function is saved, it is used in the Command Window for a projec-

tile that is fired at a velocity of 230 m/s and an angle of 39°.

>> [h d]=trajectory(230,39)

h =
  1.0678e+003

d =
  5.2746e+003

