226

Chapter 7: User-Defined Functions and Function Files

7.2.3 The H1 Line and Help Text Lines

The H1 line and help text lines are comment lines (lines that begin with the per-
cent, %, sign) following the function definition line. They are optional but are
frequently used to provide information  about the function. The H1 line is the
first comment line and usually contains the name and a short definition of the
function.  When  a  user  types  (in  the  Command  Window)  lookfor  a_word,
MATLAB  searches  for  a_word  in  the  H1  lines  of  all  the  functions,  and  if  a
match is found, the H1 line that contains the match is displayed.

 The help text lines are comment lines that follow the H1 line. These lines
contain an explanation of the function and any instructions related to the input
and output arguments. The comment lines that are typed between the function
definition line and the first non-comment line (the H1 line and the help text) are
displayed when the user types help function_name in the Command Win-
dow.  This  is  true  for  MATLAB  built-in  functions  as  well  as  the  user-defined
functions. For example, for the function loan in Figure 7-2, if help  loan is
typed in the Command Window (make sure the current directory or the search
path includes the directory where the file is saved), the display on the screen is:

>> help loan

loan calculates monthly and total payment of loan.

Input arguments:

amount=loan amount in $.

rate=annual interest rate in percent.

years=number of years.

Output arguments:

mpay=monthly payment, tpay=total payment.

A function file can include additional comment lines in the function body. These
lines are ignored by the help command.

7.2.4 Function Body

The  function  body  contains  the  computer  program  (code)  that  actually  per-
forms the computations. The code can use all MATLAB programming features.
This includes calculations, assignments, any built-in or user-defined functions,
flow control (conditional statements and loops) as explained in Chapter 6, com-
ments, blank lines, and interactive input and output.

7.3 LOCAL AND GLOBAL VARIABLES

All the variables in a function file are local (the input and output arguments and
any variables that are assigned values within the function file). This means that
the  variables  are  defined  and  recognized  only  inside  the  function  file.  When  a

