7.6 Examples of Simple User-Defined Functions

229

x =
        440.06
y =
     158423.02

7.6 EXAMPLES OF SIMPLE USER-DEFINED FUNCTIONS

Sample Problem 7-1: User-defined function for a math function

Write a function file (name it chp7one) for the function

. The

input to the function is x and the output is
can be a vector. Use the function to calculate:
(a)
(b)

 for x = 6.
 for x = 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11.

f x
f x

f x

. Write the function such that x

Solution

The function file for the function

f x

 is:

function y=chp7one(x)

Function definition line.

y=(x.^4.*sqrt(3*x+5))./(x.^2+1).^2;

Assignment to output argument.

Note that the mathematical expression in the function file is written for element-
by-element calculations. In this way if x is a vector, y will also be a vector. The
function is saved and then the search path is modified to include the directory
where the file was saved. As shown below, the function is used in the Command
Window.
(a) Calculating the function for
 can be done by typing chp7one(6) in
the Command Window, or by assigning the value of the function to a new vari-
able:

6=

x

>> chp7one(6)

ans =
    4.5401

>> F=chp7one(6)

F =
    4.5401

(b) To calculate the function for several values of x, a vector with the values of x
is created and then used for the argument of the function.

>> x=1:2:11

x =
     1     3     5     7     9    11

230

Chapter 7: User-Defined Functions and Function Files

>> chp7one(x)

ans =
    0.7071    3.0307    4.1347    4.8971    5.5197    6.0638

Another way is to type the vector x directly in the argument of the function.

>> H=chp7one([1:2:11])

H =
    0.7071    3.0307    4.1347    4.8971    5.5197    6.0638

Sample Problem 7-2: Converting temperature units

Write  a  user-defined  function  (name  it  FtoC)  that  converts  temperature  in
degrees F to temperature in degrees C. Use the function to solve the following
, due to a change in the tem-
problem. The change in the length of an object,
 is the coefficient of thermal
, where
perature,
expansion. Determine the change in the area of a rectangular (4.5 m by 2.25 m)

, is given by:

L T

=

L

L

T

aluminum  (
92°F.

Solution

  1/°C)  plate  if  the  temperature  changes  from  40°F  to

A user-defined function that converts degrees F to degrees C is:

function C=FtoC(F)

Function definition line.

%FtoC converts degrees F to degrees C

C=5*(F-32)./9;

Assignment to output argument.

A script file (named Chapter7Example2) that calculates the change of the area
of the plate due to the temperature is:

a1=4.5; b1=2.25; T1=40; T2=92; alpha=23e-6;

deltaT=FtoC(T2)-FtoC(T1);

Using the FtoC function to calculate the
temperature difference in degrees C.

a2=a1+alpha*a1*deltaT;

b2=b1+alpha*b1*deltaT;

Calculating the new length.

Calculating the new width.

AreaChange=a2*b2-a1*b1;

Calculating the change in the area.

fprintf('The  change  in  the  area  is  %6.5f  meters
square.',AreaChange)

Executing the script file in the Command Window gives the solution:

>> Chapter7Example2
The change in the area is 0.01346 meters square.

