8.1 Polynomials

263

polyval is then used to calculate the value at x = 9.

>> p = [1 -12.1 40.59 -17.015 -71.95 35.88];

>> polyval(p,9)

ans =
  7.2611e+003

(b) To  plot  the  polynomial,  a  vector  x  is  first  defined  with  elements  ranging
from –1.5 to 6.7. Then a vector y is created with the values of the polynomial for
every element of x. Finally, a plot of y vs. x is made.

>> x=-1.5:0.1:6.7;

>> y=polyval(p,x);

>> plot(x,y)

Calculating the value of the polyno-
mial for each element of the vector x.

The plot created by MATLAB is presented below (axis labels were added with
the Plot Editor).

y

150

100

50

0

-50

-100

-150

-200

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

x

8.1.2 Roots of a Polynomial

The roots of a polynomial are the values of the argument for which the value of
the  polynomial  is  equal  to  zero.  For  example,  the  roots  of  the  polynomial

  are  the  values  of  x  for  which

,  which  are

 and x = 3.

MATLAB has a function, called roots, that determines the root, or roots,

of a polynomial. The form of the function is:

r = roots(p)

r  is  a  column  vector  with
the roots of the polynomial.

p is a row vector with the coef-
ficients of the polynomial.

For example, the roots of the polynomial in Sample Problem 8-1 can be deter-
mined by:

264

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

>> p= 1 -12.1 40.59 -17.015 -71.95 35.88];

>> r=roots(p)

r =
    6.5000
    4.0000
    2.3000
   -1.2000
    0.5000

When  the  roots  are  known,  the  polynomial  can
actually be written as:

The roots command is very useful for finding the roots of a quadratic equa-

tion. For example, to find the roots of

, type:

>> roots([4 10 -8])

ans =
   -3.1375
    0.6375

When  the  roots  of  a  polynomial  are  known,  the  poly  command  can  be
used for determining the coefficients of the polynomial. The form of the poly
command is:

p = poly(r)

p is a row vector with the coef-
ficients of the polynomial.

r is a vector (row or column)
with the roots of the polynomial.

For example, the coefficients of the polynomial in Sample Problem 8-1 can be
obtained from the roots of the polynomial (see above) by:

>> r=[6.5 4 2.3 -1.2 0.5];

>> p=poly(r)

p =
    1.0000  -12.1000   40.5900  -17.0150  -71.9500   35.8800

8.1.3 Addition, Multiplication, and Division of Polynomials

Addition:

Two polynomials can be added (or subtracted) by adding (subtracting) the vec-
tors  of  the  coefficients.  If  the  polynomials  are  not  of  the  same  order  (which
means that the vectors of the coefficients are not of the same length), the shorter
vector has to be modified to be of the same length as the longer vector by add-
ing zeros (called padding) in front. For example, the polynomials

 and

 can be added

by:

