278

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

8.4 THE BASIC FITTING INTERFACE

The basic fitting interface is a tool that can be used to perform curve fitting and
interpolation interactively. By using the interface the user can:
• Curve-fit the data points with polynomials of various degrees up to 10, and with

spline and Hermite interpolation methods.

• Plot the various fits on the same graph so that they can be compared.

• Plot the residuals of the various polynomial fits and compare the norms of the

residuals.

• Calculate the values of specific points with the various fits.

• Add the equations of the polynomials to the plot.

To  activate  the  basic  fitting  inter-
face,  the  user  first  has  to  make  a  plot
of  the  data  points.  Then  the  interface
is  activated  by  selecting  Basic  Fitting
in  the  Tools  menu,  as  shown  on  the
right.  This  opens  the  Basic  Fitting
Window,  shown  in  Figure  8-3.  When
the window first opens, only one panel
(the
 panel) is visible. The win-
dow can be extended to show a second
panel (the
 panel) by
  button.  One  click
clicking  on  the
adds the first section of the panel, and
a second click makes the window look
as shown in Figure 8-3. The window can be reduced back by clicking on the
button. The first two items in the Basic Fitting Window are related to the selec-
tion of the data points:

Used to select a specific set of data points for curve fitting in a fig-
ure that has more than one set of data points. Only one set of data points can
be curve-fitted at a time, but multiple fits can be performed simultaneously on
the same set.

   When this box is checked, the data is centered at zero
mean and scaled to unit standard deviation. This might be needed in order to
improve the accuracy of numerical computation.

The next four items are in the
fit.

 panel and are related to the display of the

   The user selects the fits to be displayed in the
figure. The selections include interpolation with spline interpolant (interpola-
tion  method)  that  uses  the  spline  function,  interpolation  with  Hermite
interpolant that uses the pchip function, and polynomials of various degrees

8.4 The Basic Fitting Interface

279

Figure 8-3: The Basic Fitting Window.

that  use  the  polyfit  function.  Several  fits  can  be  selected  and  displayed
simultaneously.

   When this box is checked, the equations of the polynomials
that were selected for the fit are displayed in the figure. The equations are dis-
played  with  the  number  of  significant  digits  selected  in  the  adjacent  sign
menu.

   When this box is checked, a plot that shows the residual at each
data  point  is  created  (residuals  are  defined  in  Section  8.2.1).  Choices  in  the
menus include a bar plot, a scatter plot, and a line plot that can be displayed
as a subplot in the same Figure Window that has the plot of the data points or
as a separate plot in a different Figure Window.

   When this box is checked, the norm of the residuals
is displayed in the plot of the residuals. The norm of the residual is a measure
of the quality of the fit. A smaller norm corresponds to a better fit.

The  next  three  items  are  in  the
numerical information for one fit, independently of the fits that are displayed:

  panel.  They  provide  the

   The user selects the fit to be examined numerically. The fit is shown on the
 panel.

plot only if it is selected in the

      Displays  the  numerical  results  for  the
polynomial fit that is selected in the
 menu. It includes the coefficients of
the  polynomial  and  the  norm  of  the  residuals.  The  results  can  be  saved  by

280

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

clicking on the

 button.

      Provides  a  means  for  obtaining  interpolated  (or  extrapolated)
numerical  values  for  specified  values  of  the  independent  variable.  Enter  the
value of the independent variable in the box, and click on the
 but-
ton. When the
 box is checked, the point is displayed on
the plot.

As an example, the basic fitting interface is used for fitting the data points
from Sample Problem 8-3. The Basic Fitting Window is the one shown in Figure

Figure 8-4: A Figure Window modified by the Basic Fitting Interface.

8-3, and the corresponding Figure Window is shown in Figure 8-4. The Figure
Window includes a plot of the points, one interpolation fit (spline), two polyno-
mial fits (linear and cubic), a display of the equations of the polynomial fits, and
 box of the Basic
a mark of the point x = 1.5 that is entered in the
Fitting Window. The Figure Window also includes a plot of the residuals of the
polynomial fits and a display of their norm.

