286

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

Tplot=273+[-20:120];

muplot = exp(p(1)*Tplot.^2 + p(2)*Tplot + p(3));

semilogy(TK,mu,'o',Tplot,muplot)

When the program executes (saved as Chap8SamPro7), the coefficients that are
determined by the polyfit function are displayed in the Command Window
(shown below) as three elements of the vector p.

>> Chap8SamPro7

p =
    0.0003   -0.2685   47.1673

With these coefficients the viscosity of the oil as a function of temperature is:

The  plot  that  is  generated  shows  that  the  equation  correlates  well  to  the  data
points (axis labels were added with the Plot Editor).

101

100

10-1

10-2

)

2
m
/
s
*
N

(

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
V

i

10-3

250

300

350

400

Temperature (K)

8.6 PROBLEMS

1. Plot  the  polynomial

  in  the  domain
.  First  create  a  vector  for  x,  next  use  the  polyval  function  to

calculate y, and then use the plot function.

2. Plot  the  polynomial

.
First create a vector for x, next use the polyval function to calculate y, and
then use the plot function.

  in  the  domain

3. Determine  the  polynomial

,
.  Make  a  plot  of  the  polynomial  in  the  domain

  that  has  roots  at

,

,  and
.

8.6 Problems

287

4. Use MATLAB to carry out the following multiplication of two polynomi-

als:

5. Use MATLAB to carry out the following multiplication of polynomials:

Plot the polynomial in the domain

.

6. Use MATLAB to divide the polynomial

 by the polynomial

.

7. Use MATLAB to divide the polynomial

 by the polynomial

.

8. The  product  of  four  consecutive  even  integers  is  1,488,384.  Using  MAT-
LAB’s built-in function for operations with polynomials, determine the two
integers.

9. The product of three integers with spacing of 3 between them (e.g., 9, 12, 15)
is 11,960. Using MATLAB’s built-in functions for operations with polyno-
mials, determine the three integers.

10. The product of three distinct integers is 6,240. The sum of the numbers is
85. The difference between the largest and the smallest is 57. Using MAT-
LAB’s  built-in  functions  for  operations  with  polynomials,  determine  the
three integers.

11. A rectangular steel container (no top) has the
outside  dimensions  shown  in  the  figure.  The
thickness  of  the  bottom  surface  is  t,  and  the
thickness  of  side  walls  is
.  Determine  t  if
the  weight  of  the  container  is  1,300  lb.  The
specific weight of steel is 0.284 lb/in.3.

80 in.

120 in.

240 in.

288

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

12. An  aluminum  container  has  the  geometry
shown in the figure (the bottom part is a rect-
angular box and the top is half a cylinder). The
outside dimensions are shown. The wall thick-
ness of the bottom and all the vertical walls is
2t,  and  the  walls  thickness  of  the  cylindrical
section is t. Determine t if the tank weight is 30
lb. The specific weight of aluminum is 0.101 lb/
in.3.

24 in.

10 in.

12 in.

13. A  rectangular  box  (no  top)  is  welded  together  using
sheet metal. The length of the box’s base is 18 in. longer
than its width. The total surface area of the sheet metal
that is used is 2,500 in.2.
(a) Using polynomials write an expression for the vol-

h

ume V in terms of x.

(b) Make a plot of V versus x for
(c) Determine  the  dimensions  of  the  box  that  maxi-

in.

mizes the volume and determine that volume.

x+18

x

14. The  probability  P  of  selecting  three  distinct  numbers  out  of  n  numbers  is

calculated by:

Determine how many numbers, n, should be in a lottery game such that the
probability of matching three numbers out of n numbers will be at least 1/
100,000, but not greater than 1/95,000.

15. Write a user-defined function that adds or subtracts two polynomials of any
order.  Name  the  function  p=polyadd(p1,p2,operation).  The  first
two input arguments p1 and p2 are the vectors of the coefficients of the two
polynomials. (If the two polynomials are not of the same order, the function
adds  the  necessary  zero  elements  to  the  shorter  vector.)  The  third  input
argument operation is a string that can be either ‘add’ or ‘sub’, for
adding  or  subtracting  the  polynomials,  respectively,  and  the  output  argu-
ment is the resulting polynomial.

Use the function to add and subtract the following polynomials:

 and

16. Write  a  user-defined  function  that  multiplies  two  polynomials.  Name  the
function p=polymult(p1,p2). The two input arguments p1 and p2 are
vectors of the coefficients of the two polynomials. The output argument p is
the resulting polynomial.

Use the function to multiply the following polynomials:

8.6 Problems

289

Check the answer with MATLAB’s built-in function conv.

 and

17. Write a user-defined function that calculates the maximum (or minimum) of

a quadratic equation of the form:

f x

=

ax2

+

bx

+

c

Name the function [x,y,w] = maxormin(a,b,c). The input arguments
are the coefficients a, b, and c. The output arguments are x, the coordinate
of the maximum (or minimum); y, the maximum (or minimum) value; and
w, which is equal to 1 if y is a maximum and equal to 2 if y is a minimum.

Use the function to determine the maximum or minimum of the follow-

ing functions:
(a)

              (b)

18. A cylinder with base radius r and height h is con-
structed inside a sphere such that it is in contact
with the surface of a sphere, as shown in the fig-
ure. The radius of the sphere is
(a) Create  a  polynomial  expression  for  the  vol-

11=

in.

R

r

R

h

ume V of the cylinder in terms of h.

(b) Make a plot of V versus h for
(c) Using  the  roots  command  determine  h  if
the volume of the cylinder is 2,000 in.3.

in.

(d) Determine the value of h that corresponds to the cylinder with the larg-

est possible volume, and determine that volume.

19. Consider the parabola:

, and the point

.

P 3 4,
(a) Write  a  polynomial  expres-
sion  for  the  distance  d  from
point P to an arbitrary point Q
on the parabola.

(b) Make  a  plot  of  d  versus  y  for

.

y

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

P (3,4)

d

0

2

4

Q

6
x

8

10

12

(c) Determine the coordinates of Q if
(d) Determine the coordinates of Q that correspond to the smallest d, and

 (there are two points).

3=

d

calculate the corresponding value of d.

(e) Make a plot that shows the parabola, point P, the two points from part

(c), and the point from part (d).

290

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

20. The following data is given:

x
y

–5
12

–4
10

–1
6

1
2

4
–3

6
–6

9
–11

10
–12

(a) Use linear least-squares regression to determine the coefficients m and b in
 that best fits the data.

the function

b+

mx

=

y

(b) Make a plot that shows the function and the data points.

21. The  boiling  temperature  of  water

  at  various altitudes  h is given  in  the
following table. Determine a linear equation in the form
 that
best fits the data. Use the equation for calculating the boiling temperature
at 5,000 m. Make a plot of the points and the equation.

b+

TB

TB

mh

=

h (ft)

–1,000

T ( °F )

213.9

0

212

3,000

206.2

8,000

196.2

15,000

22,000

28,000

184.4

172.6

163.1

=

22. The U.S. population in selected years between 1815 and 1965 is listed in the
table  below.  Determine
form
, where t is the number of years after 1800 and P is the
a1t
P
population in millions, that best fits the data. Use the equation to estimate
the population in 1915 (the population was 98.8 millions). Make a plot of
the population versus the year that shows the data points and the equation.

a  quadratic

equation

a2t2

the

in

a0

+

+

Year

Population
(millions)

1815

8.3

1845

19.7

1875

44.4

1905

83.2

1935

127.1

1965

190.9

23. The number of bacteria

 measured at different times t is given in the fol-
Ne t
lowing  table.  Determine  an  exponential  function  in  the  form
that best fits the data. Use the equation to estimate the number of bacteria
after 5 h. Make a plot of the points and the equation.

NB

NB

=

t (h)
NB

0

500

1

600

3

4

6

7

9

1,000

1,400

2,100

2,700

4,100

24. Growth data of a sunflower plant is given in the following table:

Day

Height (in.)

7

8.5

21

21

35

50

49

77

63

89

77

98

91

99

8.6 Problems

291

The data can be modeled with a function in the form

, where y

is  the  height,  H  is  a  maximum  height,  a  and  b  are  constants,  and  t  is  the
number of days. By using the method described in Section 8.2.2, and assum-
in., determine the constants a and b such that the function
ing that
best fits the data. Use the function to estimate the height in day 40. In one
figure, plot the function and the data points.

102

H

=

25. Use the growth data from Problem 24 for the following:

(a) Curve-fit the data with a third-order polynomial. Use the polynomial to

estimate the height in day 40.

(b) Fit the data with linear and spline interpolations and use each interpo-

lation to estimate the height in day 40.

In each part make a plot of the data points (circle markers) and the fitted
curve  or  the  interpolated  curves.  Note  that  part  (b)  has  two  interpolation
curves.

26. The following points are given:

x

y

1

12

2.2

9

3.7

6.6

6.4

5.5

9

7.2

11.5

14.2

17.8

20.5

23.2

9.2

9.6

8.5

6.5

2.2

(a) Fit the data with a first-order polynomial. Make a plot of the points and

the polynomial.

(b) Fit the data with a second-order polynomial. Make a plot of the points

and the polynomial.

(c) Fit the data with a third-order polynomial. Make a plot of the points

and the polynomial.

(d) Fit the data with an fifth-order polynomial. Make a plot of the points

and the polynomial.

27. The  standard  air  density,  D  (average  of  measurements  made),  at  different

heights, h, from sea level up to a height of 33 km is given below.

h (km)
D (kg/m3)
h (km)

D (kg/m3)

0

1.2

18

3

0.91

21

6

0.66

24

9

0.47

27

12

0.31

30

15

0.19

33

0.12

0.075

0.046

0.029

0.018

0.011

(a) Make the following four plots of the data points (density as a function
of height): (1) both axes with linear scale; (2) h with log axis, D with lin-
ear axis; (3) h with linear axis, D with log axis; (4) both log axes. Accord-
ing  to  the  plots,  choose  a  function  (linear,  power,  exponential,  or

292

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

logarithmic) that best fits the data points and determine the coefficients
of the function.

(b) Plot the function and the points using linear axes.

the

28. Write a user-defined function that determines the best fit of an exponential
function  of
function  [b,m]  =
expofit(x,y), where the input arguments x and y are vectors with the
coordinates of the data points, and the output arguments b and m are the
constants of the fitted exponential equation. Use  expofit to fit the data
below. Make a plot that shows the data points and the function.

.  Name

form

the

x

y

0.4

1.7

2.2

10.1

3.1

26.9

5.0

61.2

6.6

158

7.6

398

29. Estimated values of thermal conductivity of silicon at different temperatures

are given in the following table.

T   (K)

k (W/m-K)

T   (K)

2

46

80

4

300

100

k (W/m-K)

1,350

900

6

8

10

20

40

60

820

1,560

2,300

5,000

3,500

2,100

150

400

250

190

350

120

500

1,000

1,400

75

30

20

(a) Make a plot of k versus T using log scale on both axes.

(b) Curve-fit  the  data  with  a  second-order  polynomial

  in
.  Once  the  coefficients  a,  b,  and  c  are
which
determined,  write an equation  for  k as a function of
.  Use this
equation for curve-fitting the data. Make a second plot that shows the
data points with markers and the curve-fitted equation with a solid line.

  and

(c) Repeat part (b) using a third-order polynomial.

 30. Measurements  of  the  concentration,  C,  of  a  substance  during  a  chemical

reaction at different times t are shown in the table.

t (h)

C (g/L)

0.5

1.7

1.0

3.1

1.5

5.7

2.0

9.1

2.5

6.4

3.0

3.7

3.5

2.8

4.0

1.6

4.5

1.2

5.0

0.8

5.5

0.7

6.0

0.6

(a) Suppose that the data can be modeled with an equation in the form:

Determine the coefficients a0, a1, and a2 such that the equation best fits
h.
the  data.  Use  the  equation  to  estimate  the  concentration  at

8.6 Problems

293

Make a plot of the data points and the equation.

(b) Suppose that the data can be modeled with an equation in the form:

Determine the coefficients a0, a1, a2, and a3 such that the equation best
fits the data. Use the equation to estimate the concentration at
h.
Make a plot of the data points and the equation.

31. Use the data from Problem 30 for the following:

(a) Fit  the  data  with  linear  interpolation.  Estimate  the  concentration  at
.  Make  a  plot  that  shows  the  data  points  and  curve  made  of

interpolated points.

(b) Fit  the  data  with  spline  interpolation.  Estimate  the  concentration  at
h. Make a plot that shows the data points and a curve made of

interpolated points.

32. The relationship between two variables y and x is known to be:

The following data points are given:

y

=

a

x
-------------
x+
b

x
y

5
15

10
25

15
32

20
33

25
37

30
35

35
38

40
39

45
41

50
42

Determine  the constants  a  and  b by  curve-fitting the  equation  to  the  data
points.  Make  a  plot  of  y  versus  x.  In  the  plot  show  the  data  points  with
markers and the curve-fitted equation with a solid line. Use the equation to
estimate y at
. (The curve fitting can be done by writing the reciprocal
of the equation and using a first-order polynomial.)

33. Curve-fit the data from the previous problem with a third-order polynomial.
. Make a plot of the points and

Use the polynomial to estimate y at
the polynomial.

34. When  rubber  is  stretched,  its  elongation  is  initially  proportional  to  the
applied  force,  but  as  it  reaches  about  twice  its  original  length,  the  force
required to stretch the rubber increases rapidly. The force, as a function of
elongation, that was required to stretch a rubber specimen that was initially
3 in. long is displayed in the following table.
(a) Curve-fit the data with a fourth-order polynomial. Make a plot of the
data  points  and  the  polynomial.  Use  the  polynomial  to  estimate  the
force when the rubber specimen was 11.5 in. long.

(b) Fit the data with spline interpolation (use MATLAB’s built-in function
interp1). Make a plot that shows the data points and a curve made by
interpolation. Use interpolation to estimate the force when the rubber

294

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

specimen was 11.5 in. long.

Force (lb)
Elongation (in.)
Force (lb)
Elongation (in.)

0
0
1.92
9.6

0.6
1.2
3.12
10.8

0.9
2.4
4.14
12.0

1.16
3.6
5.34
13.2

1.18
4.8
6.22
14.4

1.19
6.0
7.12
15.6

1.24
7.2
7.86
16.8

1.48
8.4
8.42
18

35. The transmission of light through a transparent solid can be described by

the equation:

  is  the  transmitted  intensity,

  is  the  intensity  of  the  incident
  where
I0
IT
 is the absorption coefficient, L is the length of the transparent solid,
beam,
and R is the fraction of light which is reflected at the interface. If the light is
normal  to  the  interface  and  the  beams  are  transmitted  through  air,

  where  n  is  the  index  of  refraction  for  the  transparent  solid.

Experiments measuring the intensity of light transmitted through specimens
of a transparent solid of various lengths are given in the following table. The
intensity of the incident beam is 5 W/m2.

L (cm)
 (W/m2)

IT

0.5
4.2

1.2
4.0

1.7
3.8

2.2
3.6

4.5
2.9

6.0
2.5

Use this data and curve fitting to determine the absorption coefficient and
index of refraction of the solid.

