298

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

[x fval]=fzero(function, x0) assigns the value of the function at x to
the variable fval.
x=fzero(function, x0, optimset(‘display’,‘iter’)) displays
the output of each iteration during the process of finding the solution.

• When the function can be written in the form of a polynomial, the solution, or
the roots, can be found with the roots command, as explained in Chapter 8
(Section 8.1.2).

• The fzero command can also be used to find the value of x where the function
has a specific value. This is done by translating the function up or down. For
example, in the function of Sample Problem 9-1 the first value of  x where the
function  is  equal  to  0.1  can  be  determined  by  solving  the  equation

. This is shown below:

>> x=fzero('x*exp(-x)-0.3',0.5)

x =
    0.4894

9.2 FINDING A MINIMUM OR A MAXIMUM OF A FUNCTION

y

f x=

In many applications there is a need to determine the local minimum or maxi-
. In calculus the value of x that corre-
mum of a function of the form
sponds to a local minimum or maximum is determined by finding the zero of
the derivative of the function. The value of y is determined by substituting the x
into  the  function.  In  MATLAB  the  value  of  x  where  a  one-variable  function
 has a minimum can be determined with the
f x
fminbnd command which has the form:

 within the interval

x = fminbnd(function,x1,x2)

The value of x where the
function has a minimum.

The function.

The interval of x.

• The function can be entered as a string expression, or as a function handle, in

the same way as with the fzero command. See Section 9.1 for details.

• The value of the function at the minimum can be added to the output by using

the option
          [x fval]=fminbnd(function,x1,x2)

where the value of the function at x is assigned to the variable fval.

• Within a given interval, the minimum of a function can either be at one of the
end points of the interval or at a point within the interval where the slope of the
function  is  zero  (local  minimum).  When  the  fminbnd  command  is  executed,
MATLAB looks for a local minimum. If a local minimum is found, its value is

9.2 Finding a Minimum or a Maximum of a Function

299

compared to the value of the function at the end points of the interval. MAT-
LAB returns the point with the actual minimum value for the interval.

For  example,  consider

the

function

30

20

10

, which is plot-
ted in  the  interval
 in the  figure  on
the  right.  It  can  be  observed  that  there  is  a
local minimum between 5 and 6, and that the
.  Using  the
absolute  minimum  is  at
interval
fminbnd  command  with
 to find the location of the local min-
imum and the value of the function at this point gives:

the

0=

x

-40

-30

-10

-20

)
x
(
f

0

0

1

2

3

4
x

5

6

7

8

>> [x fval]=fminbnd('x^3-12*x^2+40.25*x-36.5',3,8)

x =
    5.6073
fval =
  -11.8043

The local minimum is at
value of the function at this point is –11.8043.

. The

5.6073

=

x

Notice that the fminbnd command gives the local minimum. If the interval is
changed to

, fminbnd gives:

>> [x fval]=fminbnd('x^3-12*x^2+40.25*x-36.5',0,8)

x =
     0
fval =
  -36.5000

The minimum is at
of the function at this point is –36.5.

. The value

0=

x

.

x

0=

For this interval the fminbnd command gives the absolute minimum which is
at the end point
• The fminbnd command can also be used to find the maximum of a function.
This is done by multiplying the function by –1 and finding the minimum. For
 (from Sample Problem
example, the maximum of the function
 can be determined by finding the minimum of the
9-1) in the interval
 as shown below:
function

>> [x fval]=fminbnd('-x*exp(-x)+0.2',0,8)

x =
    1.0000
fval =
   -0.1679

The maximum is at x = 1.0. The value of
the function at this point is 0.1679.

