9.6 Problems

313

    3.0000

    0.7607

The plot generated by the program of the velocity as a function of distance is:

25

20

15

10

)
s
/
m

(

y
t
i
c
o
e
v

l

5

0
0

0.5

1

1.5
x (m)

2

2.5

3

9.6 PROBLEMS

1. Determine  the  two  solutions  of  the  equation

  between

and

.

2. Determine the solution of the equation

3. Determine the three roots of the equation

.

.

4. Determine the positive roots of the equation

.

5. The area A of a circle segment is given by:

Determine the angle   (in degrees) if

in. and

in2.

6. The position s of the slider as a func-
  in  the  crank-slider  mecha-

tion  of
nism shown is given by:

Given

in.,

in., and

in., determine the angle  , when

in. (There are two solutions.)

7. The  van  der  Waals  equation  gives  a  relationship  between  the  pressure  p

(atm), volume V (L), and temperature T (K) for a real gas:

314

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

where n is the number of moles,
R
stant, and a (L2 atm/mol2) and b (L/mol) are material constants.

0.08206

(L atm)/(mol K) is the gas con-

=

Determine  the  volume  of  1.5  mol  of  nitrogen  (

a

=

1.39

  L2  atm/mol2,

b

=

0.03913

 L/mol) at temperature of 350 K and pressure of 70 atm.

8. An estimate of the minimum velocity required for a round flat stone to skip
when it hits the water is given by (Lyderic Bocquet, “The Physics of Stone
Skipping,” Am. J. Phys., vol. 71, no. 2, February 2003):

where M and d are the stone mass and diameter,

 is the water density, C is

w

a coefficient,

 is the tilt angle of the stone,

 is the incidence angle, and

g

=

9.81

C

1=

,

m/s2.  Determine  d  if
1,000 kg/m3, and
w =

V

0.8=

m/s.  (Assume  that

M 0.1=

kg,

=

=

10

.)

9. A  series  RLC  circuit  with  an  AC  voltage
source is shown. The amplitude of the cur-
rent, I, in this circuit is given by:

V

d

=

2 fd

where
 is the driving
 in which
frequency; R and C are the resistance of the
resistor and capacitance of the capacitor, respectively; and

fd

C

R

L

vm

 is the ampli-

tude  of  V.  For  the  circuit  in  the  figure

R

80=

,

F,

Determine

H, and

vm

10=
 for which

V.

A. (There are two solutions.)

10. For  fluid  flow  in  a  pipe,  the  Colebrook–White  (or  Colebrook)  equation
gives  a  relationship  between  the  friction  coefficient,  f,  and  the  Reynolds
number:

where k/d is the pipe relative roughness. Determine f if

, and

.

9.6 Problems

315

11. Using MATLAB’s built-in function fminbnd, determine the minimum and

the maximum of the function

12. A flat rectangular sheet of metal that is
70 in. wide and 120 in. long is formed to
make  a  container  with  the  geometry
shown  in  the  figure.  (Additional  flat
metal  pieces  are  attached  at  the  ends.)
Using  MATLAB’s  built-in  function
fminbnd,  determine  the  value  of  h
such  that  the  container  will  have  the
maximum  possible  volume,  and  deter-
mine the corresponding volume.

120 in.

h

45

45

13. Using  MATLAB’s  built-in  function  fminbnd,
determine  the  dimensions  (radius  r  and  height  h)
and the volume of the cylinder with the largest vol-
ume  that  can  be  made  inside  of  a  cone  with  a
radius R of 20 in. and height H of 50 in.

14. A prismatic box with equilateral triangular base is
made from a equilateral triangular sheet with sides s
by  cutting  off  the  corners  and  folding  the  edges
in.,  use  MAT-
along  the  dashed  lines.  For
LAB’s built-in function fminbnd to determine the
value of x such that the box will have the maximum
possible  volume,  and  determine  the  corresponding
volume.

15. An  RLC  circuit  with  an  alternating  voltage
  is
source  is  shown.  The  source  voltage
, in
, where
given by
vs
 is the driving frequency. The ampli-
which
fd
tude  of  the  current,  I,  in  this  circuit  is  given
by:

vs
2 fd

vm

sin

dt

=

=

d

vs

H=50 in.

h

r

R=20 in.

x

s

R

L

C

where  R  and  C  are  the  resistance  of  the  resistor  and  capacitance  of  the

capacitor,  respectively.  For  the  circuit

in  the  figure

F,

316

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

V.  Plot  I  as  a  function  of  f  for
H,
 Hz. Using MATLAB’s built-in function fminbnd, determine

 ,  and

26=

vm

the frequency where I is maximum and the corresponding value of I.

16. A  108-in.-long  beam  AB  is  attached  to
the wall  with a pin  at point  A and to a
68-in.-long cable CD. A load
lb
is attached to the beam at point B. The
tension in the cable T is given by:

W 250
=

C

LC

A

D

d

L

B

W

where L and LC are the lengths of the beam and the cable, respectively, and d
is the distance from point A to point D, where the cable is attached. Make a
plot of T versus d. Determine the distance d where the tension in the cable is
the smallest.

17. Use MATLAB to calculate the following integrals:

(a)

11

1

(b)

7

2

18. Use MATLAB to calculate the following integrals:

(a)

3

0

(b)

8

0

19. The speed of a race car during the first 7 s of a race is given by:

t (s)
v (mi/h)

0
0

1
14

2
39

3
69

4
95

5
114

6
129

7
139

Determine the distance the car traveled during the first 7 s.

20. A  rubber  band  is  stretched  by fixing  one  end  pulling the  other  end.  Mea-
surements of the applied force at different displacements are given in the fol-
lowing table:

x (in.)
F (lb)

0
0

0.4
0.85

0.8
1.30

1.2
1.60

1.6
1.87

2.0
2.14

2.4
2.34

2.8
2.52

Determine the work done by the force while stretching the rubber band.

9.6 Problems

317

21. Use  numerical  integration  to  approxi-
mate the size of the shaded area shown in
the figure. Create a vector with values of
x from 1 through 10 and estimate the cor-
responding  y  coordinate.  Then,  deter-
mine the area by using MATLAB’s built-
in function trapz.

y

6

5

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

x

22. The electric wire that connects the house to the

pole has the shape of a catenary:

By using the equation:

L

=

b

a

1

+

f x 2

xd

determine the length of the wire.

y

24 ft

-12 ft

x

26 ft

23. The flow rate Q (volume of fluid per sec-
ond)  in  a  round  pipe  can  be  calculated
by:

R

r

Q

=

r

0

2 vr rd

For turbulent flow the velocity profile

can be estimated by:

. Determine Q for

R

=

0.25

in.,

n

7=

,

vmax

80=

in./s.

24. The  length  of  a  curve  given  by  a  parametric

equation

x t

,

y t

 is given by:

y

b

a

x t

2

+

y t

2

td

The cardioid curve shown in the figure is given
by:

  and

with
and determine the length of the curve.

.  Plot  the  cardioid  with

b

5=

x

25. The variation of gravitational acceleration g with altitude y is given by:

g

=

R2
---------------------g0
R y+ 2

R

m/s2  is  the
where
gravitational acceleration at sea level. The change in the gravitational poten-

km  is  the  radius  of  the  Earth,  and

6371

9.81

g0

=

=

318

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

tial energy,  U, of an object that is raised from the Earth is given by:

U

=

h
mg yd

0

Determine the change in the potential energy of a satellite with a mass of
500 kg that is raised from the surface of the Earth to a height of 800 km.

y

[mi]

26. An approximate map of Lake Erie
is shown in the figure. Use numeri-
cal integration to estimate the area
of the lake. Make a list of the width
of the lake as a function of x. Start
mi  and  use  incre-
with
ments  of  20  mi,  such  that  the  last
point  is
.  Compare  the
260
result with the actual area Lake Erie, which is 9,940 square miles.

40=

100

200

100

=

x

x

27. To estimate the surface area and volume of
a  football,  the  diameter  of  the  ball  is  mea-
sured at different points along the ball. The
surface area, S, and volume, V, can be deter-
mined by:

d

S

=

2

L

0

r zd

   and

V

=

r2 zd

L

0

x
[mi]

300

z

Use the data given in the table to determine the volume and surface area of
the ball.

z (in.) 0
d (in.) 0

1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0 11.0 12.0
2.6 3.2 4.8 5.6

6.2 6.0 5.6 4.8 3.3 2.6

0

6

28. A  cross-sectional  area  has  the  geometry
of half an ellipse,  as shown in the figure
to  the  right.  The  coordinate
  of  the
centroid of the area can be calculated by:

 y

b

where A is the area given by

A

=

1
--- ab
2

,

 is the moment of the area about

My

and
the y axis, given by:

My

=

xc Ad
A

=

2b

  Determine

 when

a

a

0
40=

mm and

b

15=

mm.

y

=

b 1

x2
----–
a2

c

x

a

x

xc

dA

dx

y

–=

b 1

x2
-----–
a2

9.6 Problems

319

29. The orbit of Mercury is elliptical in shape, with

km and

km. The

perimeter of an ellipse can be calculated by
2

b

a

P

=

4a

0

. Determine the distance Mer-

where
cury travels in one orbit. Calculate the average speed at which Mercury trav-
els (in km/s) if one orbit takes about 88 days.

30. The Fresnel integrals are:

S x

=

x

sin

t 2

td

   and

C x

=

cos

t 2

td

x

0

0
Calculate
C x
S x
plot two graphs—one of
second figure plot

  and

S x

  for
S x
 versus

C x

.

  (use  spacing  of  0.05).  In  one  figure
 versus x. In a

 versus x and the other of

C x

31. Use a MATLAB built-in function to numerically solve:

Plot the numerical solution.

  for

  with

32. Use a MATLAB built-in function to numerically solve:

 for

  with

y 0

2=

In one figure plot the numerical solution as a solid line and the exact solu-
tion as discrete points.

Exact solution:

.

33. Use a MATLAB built-in function to numerically solve:

  for

  with

In one figure plot the numerical solution as a solid line and the exact solu-
tion as discrete points (10 equally spaced points).

Exact solution:

.

34. Use a MATLAB built-in function to numerically solve:

  for

  with

y 1

1=

Plot the solution.

320

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

35. The growth of a fish is often modeled by the von Bertalanffy growth model:

a

5=

lb1/3,

where w is the weight and a and b are constants. Solve the equation for w for
the  case
lb.  Make  sure  that  the
selected  time  span  is  just  long  enough  so  that  the  maximum  weight  is
approached. What is the maximum weight for this case? Make a plot of w as
a function of time.

day–1,  and

0.5=

2=

w 0

b

4=
18=

36. A  water  tank  shaped  as  a  cone  (

m,
m)  has  a  circular  hole  at  the  bottom
H
(
mm), as shown. According to Torri-
d
celli’s law, the speed v of the water that is dis-
charging from the hole is given by:

2=

R

v

=

2gh

=

9.81

where  h  is  the  height  of  the  water  and
m/s2. The rate at which the height, h,
g
of the water in the tank changes as the water
flows out through the hole is given by:

R=2 m

H=4 m

h

v

d=18 mm

Solve  the  differential  equation  for  h.  The  initial  height  of  the  water  is
m. Solve the problem for different times and find an estimate for the
h
3=
time when
m. Make a plot of h as a function of time.

0.1=

h

37. The sudden outbreak of an insect population can be modeled by the equa-

tion

The  first  term  relates  to  the  well-known  logistic population  growth  model
where N is the number of insects, R is an intrinsic growth rate, and C is the
carrying capacity of the local environment. The second term represents the
effects of bird predation. Its effect becomes significant when the population
; r is the maximum value that the second term can
reaches a critical size
Nc
reach at large values of N.

Solve the differential equation for
0.58

 day–1, and with

 and

0.55

=

R

=

 days and two growth rates,
10,000. The other parame-
 day–1. Make one plot comparing the

N 0 =

104
ters are
two solutions and discuss why this model is called an “outbreak” model.

104

Nc

C

=

=

=

,

,

r

R
104

9.6 Problems

321

38. An  airplane  uses  a  parachute
and other means of braking as it
slows  down  on  the  runway  after
landing.  Its  acceleration  is  given
m/s2.  Since

by

, the rate of change of the

velocity is given by:

Consider an airplane with a velocity of 300 km/h that opens its parachute
and starts decelerating at t = 0 s.
(a) By solving the differential equation, determine and plot the velocity as a

function of time from t = 0 s until the airplane stops.

(b) Use numerical integration to determine the distance x the airplane trav-

els as a function of time. Make a plot of x versus time.

39. The population growth of species with limited capacity can be modeled by

the equation:

where N is the population size,
tion, and k, r, and
sent  the  effect  of  predation.  Consider  the  case  where
k

 is the limiting number for the popula-
 are constants. The second term in the equation repre-
6,000,
Nmax =
. Determine N for

Nmax

0.196

40=

50=

N 0

Nc

=

r

 1/yr,
yr. Make a plot of N as a function of t.

3,000, and

Nc =

 1/yr,

vs

40. An  RL  circuit  includes  a  voltage
, a resistor
source
 , and
R
H,  as  shown  in
an  inductor
L
0.4=
the  figure.  The  differential  equation
that describes the response of the cir-
cuit is

1.8=

L
----
R

diL
--------
dt

iL+

vs
----=
R

R

vs

+
_

L

vL (t)

iL

 is the current in the inductor. Initially

where
0=
the voltage source is changed. Determine the response of the circuit for the
following three cases:

, and then at

0=

iL

t

(a)

(b)

V for

.

V for

.

322

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

Each case  corresponds  to  a different  differential equation.  The  solution is
the  current  in  the  inductor  as  a  function  of  time.  Solve  each  case  for
  versus  time  (make  two  separate
  and

s.  For  each  case  plot

vs

iL

plots on the same page).

41. Growth of many organisms can be modeled with the equation:

m t

  is  the  mass  of  the  organism,

where
mas,  and  k  is  a  constant.  Solve  the  equation  for
k
function of time.

kg1/4/day,

kg and

mmax

mmax

0.3=

m 0

1=

300

=

  is  the  assumed  maximum
  days,  given
kg. Make a plot of m as a

42. The velocity, v, of an object that falls freely due to the Earth gravity can be

modeled with the equation:

where m is the mass of the object,
g
the  equation  for  v  for the  case  that
and

0.05
m/s. Make a plot of v as a function of time.

9.81
5=

=
m

0=

v 0

=

k

m/s2, and k is a constant. Solve
s,
kg/m,
kg,

