18

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

and their assignments are displayed. A variable is not displayed if a semicolon is
typed instead of a comma. For example, the assignments of the variables a, B,
and C above can all be done in the same line.

>> a=12, B=4; C=(a-B)+40-a/B*10

a =
    12

C =
    18

The variable B is not displayed because a semi-
colon is typed at the end of the assignment.

• A variable that already exists can be reassigned a new value. For example:

>> ABB=72;

>> ABB=9;

>> ABB

ABB =
     9
>>

A value of 72 is assigned to the variable ABB.

A new value of 9 is assigned to the variable ABB.

The  current  value  of  the  variable  is  dis-
played  when  the  name  of  the  variable  is
typed and the Enter key is pressed.

• Once a variable is defined it can be used as an argument in functions. For exam-

ple:

>> x=0.75;

>> E=sin(x)^2+cos(x)^2
E =
     1
>>

1.6.2 Rules About Variable Names

A variable can be named according to the following rules:
• Must begin with a letter.

• Can be up to 63 characters long.

• Can contain letters, digits, and the underscore character.

• Cannot contain punctuation characters (e.g., period, comma, semicolon).

• MATLAB  is  case-sensitive:  it  distinguishes  between  uppercase  and  lowercase
letters. For example, AA, Aa, aA, and aa are the names of four different vari-
ables.

• No spaces are allowed between characters (use the underscore where a space is

desired).

• Avoid using the name of a built-in function for a variable (i.e., avoid using cos,
sin, exp, sqrt, etc.). Once a function name is used to for a variable name, the
function cannot be used.

