20

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

Command

clear x y z

who

whos

Outcome

Removes  only  variables  x,  y,  and  z  from  the
memory.

Displays a list of the variables currently in the
memory.

Displays a list of the variables currently in the
memory and their sizes together with informa-
tion  about  their  bytes  and  class  (see  Section
4.1).

1.8 SCRIPT FILES

So far all the commands were typed in the Command Window and were exe-
cuted when the Enter key was pressed. Although every MATLAB command can
be executed in this way, using the Command Window to execute a series of com-
mands—especially if they are related to each other (a program)—is not conve-
nient and may be difficult or even impossible. The commands in the Command
Window cannot be saved and executed again. In addition, the Command Win-
dow is not interactive. This means that every time the Enter key is pressed only
the last command is executed, and everything executed before is unchanged. If a
change  or  a  correction  is  needed  in  a  command  that  was  previously  executed
and the result of this command is used in commands that follow, all the com-
mands have to be entered and executed again.

A different (better) way of executing commands with MATLAB is first to
create a file with a list of commands (program), save it, and then run (execute)
the file. When the file runs, the commands it contains are executed in the order
that  they  are  listed.  If  needed,  the  commands  in  the  file  can  be  corrected  or
changed and the file can be saved and run again. Files that are used for this pur-
pose are called script files.

IMPORTANT  NOTE:  This  section  covers  only  the  minimum  required  in
order to run simple programs. This will allow the student to use script files when
practicing the material that is presented in this and the next two chapters (instead
of typing repeatedly in the Command Window). Script files are considered again in
Chapter  4,  where  many  additional  topics  that  are  essential  for  understanding
MATLAB and writing programs in script file are covered.

1.8.1 Notes About Script Files

• A script file is a sequence of MATLAB commands, also called a program.

• When a script file runs (is executed), MATLAB executes the commands in the
order they are written, just as if they were typed in the Command Window.

• When a script file has a command that generates an output (e.g., assignment of a

