22

Chapter 1: Starting with MATLAB

that describe the program written in the script file.

Define  three
variables.

The Run icon.

Comments.

Calculating the two roots.

Figure 1-7: A program typed in the Editor/Debugger Window.

Before a script file can be executed it has to be saved. This is done by click-
ing  Save  in  the  Toolstrip  and  selecting  Save  As...  from  the  menu  that  opens.
When saved, MATLAB adds the extension .m to the name. The rules for nam-
ing a script file follow the rules of naming a variable (must begin with a letter,
can include digits and underscore, no spaces, and up to 63 characters long). The
names of user-defined variables, predefined variables, and MATLAB commands
or functions should not be used as names of script files.

1.8.3 Running (Executing) a Script File

A script file can be executed either directly from the Editor Window by clicking
on  the  Run  icon  (see  Figure  1-7)  or  by  typing  the  file  name  in  the  Command
Window and then pressing the Enter key. For a file to be executed, MATLAB
needs to know where the file is saved. The file will be executed if the folder where
the file is saved is the current folder of MATLAB or if the folder is listed in the
search path, as explained next.

1.8.4 Current Folder

The current folder is shown in the “Current Folder” field in the desktop toolbar
of the Command Window, as shown in Figure 1-8. If an attempt is made to exe-
cute a script file by clicking on the Run icon (in the Editor Window) when the
current  folder  is  not  the  folder  where  the  script  file  is  saved,  then  the  prompt
shown in Figure 1-9 opens. The user can then change the current folder to the
folder where the script file is saved,  or add it to the search path. Once two or
more different current folders are used in a session, it is possible to switch from
one to another in the Current Folder field in the Command Window. The cur-

