Chapter 10
Three-Dimensional
Plots

Three-dimensional (3-D) plots can be a useful way to present data that consists
of more than two variables. MATLAB provides various options for displaying
three-dimensional  data.  They  include  line  and  wire,  surface,  mesh  plots,  and
many others. The plots can also be formatted to have a specific appearance and
special effects. Many of the three-dimensional plotting features are described in
this chapter. Additional information can be found in the Help Window under
Plotting and Data Visualization.

In many ways this chapter is a continuation of Chapter 5, where two-dimen-
sional plots were introduced. The 3-D plots are presented in a separate chapter
because not all MATLAB users use them. In addition, new users of MATLAB
will probably find it easier to practice 2-D plotting first and learn the material in
Chapters 6–9 before attempting 3-D plotting. It is assumed throughout the rest
of this chapter that the reader is familiar with 2-D plotting.

10.1 LINE PLOTS

A three-dimensional line plot is a line that is obtained by connecting points in
three-dimensional space. A basic 3-D plot ‘is created with the plot3 command,
which is very similar to the plot command and has the form:

plot3(x,y,z,‘line specifiers’,‘PropertyName’,property value)

x, y, and z are
vectors  of  the
coordinates  of
the points.

(Optional)  Specifiers  that
define  the  type  and  color
of the line and markers.

(Optional) Properties with val-
ues that can be used to specify
the  line  width,  and  marker’s
size and edge and fill colors.

• The  three  vectors  with  the  coordinates of the  data  points  must  have the same

number of elements.

