10.3 Plots with Special Graphics

331

10.3 PLOTS WITH SPECIAL GRAPHICS

MATLAB has additional functions for creating various types of special three-
dimensional plots. A complete list can be found in the Help Window under Plot-
ting and Data Visualization. Several of these 3-D plots are presented in Table
10-2. The  examples  in  the  table  do  not  show  all  the  options  available

Table 10-2: Specialized 3-D plots

Plot type

Example of plot

Plot a Sphere

Function format:
sphere
Returns the x, y,
and z coordi-
nates of a unit
sphere with 20
faces.
sphere(n)
Same as above
with n faces.

Plot a Cylinder

Function format:
[X,Y,Z]=
cylinder(r)
Returns the x, y,
and z coordi-
nates of cylinder
with profile r.

1

0

-1
1

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
2

0

-1

-1

1

0

0

-2

-2

2

0

3-D Bar Plot

Function format:
bar3(Y)
Each element in Y
is one bar. Col-
umns are grouped
together.

8

6

4

2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

3

2

1

Program

sphere

or:

[X,Y,Z]=sphere(20);
surf(X,Y,Z)

t=linspace(0,pi,20);
r=1+sin(t);
[X,Y,Z]=cylinder(r);
surf(X,Y,Z)
axis square

Y=[1 6.5 7; 2 6 7;
3 5.5 7; 4 5 7; 3 4
7; 2 3 7; 1 2 7];
bar3(Y)

332

Chapter 10: Three-Dimensional Plots

Table 10-2: Specialized 3-D plots (Continued)

Plot type

Example of plot

Program

3-D Stem Plot
(draws sequen-
tial points with
markers and ver-
tical lines from
the x y plane)

Function format:
stem3(X,Y,Z)

3-D Scatter Plot

Function format:
scatter3(X,
Y,Z)

40

30

20

z

10

0
1

40

30

20

z

10

0
1

0

y

-1

0

5

x

0

y

-1

0

5

x

3-D Pie Plot

Function format:
pie3(X,
explode)

10%

19%

42%

29%

10

10

t=0:0.2:10;
x=t;
y=sin(t);
z=t.^1.5;
stem3(x,y,z,'fill')
grid on
xlabel('x');
ylabel('y')
zlabel('z')

t=0:0.4:10;
x=t;
y=sin(t);
z=t.^1.5;
scatter3(x,y,z,'filled')
grid on
colormap([0.1 0.1 0.1])
xlabel('x');
ylabel('y')
zlabel('z')

X=[5 9 14 20];
explode=[0 0 1 0];
pie3(X,explode)

explode is a vector
(same length as X) of
0’s and 1’s. 1 offsets
the slice from the
center.

with each plot type. More details on each type of plot can be obtained
in the Help Window, or by typing help  command_name in the Com-
mand Window.

Polar coordinates grid in the x y plane:

A 3-D plot of a function in which the value of z is given in polar coordinates (for
example
r=
• Create a grid of values of

) can be done by following these steps:

 and r with the meshgrid function.

z

• Calculate the value of z at each point of the grid.

