10.6 Problems

10.6 PROBLEMS

341

1. The position of a moving particle as a function of time is given by:

Plot the position of the particle for

2. A  staircase  of  height  h  is  modeled  by  the

parametric equations:

x

=

r

cos

t

y

=

r

sin

t

z

=

ht
----------
2 n

,

50=

where
,
and
m  is  the  staircase  height.
h
Make a 3-D plot (shown) of the staircase.
(Create a vector t for the domain 0 to
,
2 n
and use the plot3 command.)

4=

n

s.

)
m
(

z

60

40

20

0
50

0
y (m)

-50

-50

50

0

x (m)

3. The  ladder  of  a  fire  truck  can  be  ele-
),  rotated
vated  (increase  of  angle
about the z axis (increase of angle  ),
and  extended  (increase  of  r).  Initially
the  ladder  rests  on  the  truck  (
,
0=
m). Then the ladder
8=
is moved to a new position by raising
the ladder at a rate of 5 deg/s, rotating
at a rate of 8 deg/s, and extending the
ladder at a rate of 0.6 m/s. Determine and plot the position of the tip of the
ladder for 10 s.

, and

0=

r

4. Make a 3-D surface plot of the function

 in the domain

 and

.

5. Make a 3-D surface plot of the function

 in the domain

 and

.

6. Make a 3-D surface plot of the function

 in the domain

 and

.

7. Make a 3-D mesh plot of the function

, where

R

=

x2

y2+

 in

the domain

 and

.

342

Chapter 10: Three-Dimensional Plots

8. Make a 3-D surface plot of the function
.

in the domain

 and

9. Make a plot of the ice cream cone shown in the fig-
ure.  The  cone  is  8  in.  tall  with  a  4-in.  diameter
base. The ice cream at the top is a 4-in. diameter
hemisphere.
A parametric equation for the cone is:

,

,

z

4r=

with

  and

10

8

6

4

2

0
2

A parametric equation for a sphere is:
,
,
z
y
  and

x
=
with

cos

sin

sin

sin

=

r

r

=

r cos

2

0

0

−2

−2

10. A monochromatic light that passes through a
slit produces on a screen a diffraction pattern
consisting  of  bright  and  dark  fringes.  The
intensity of the bright fringes, I, as a function
of

 can be calculated by:

where

,

 is the light wave

length, a is the width of the slits. Make
a 3-D plot (shown) that shows the rela-
  as  a  function  of
tive  intensity
, and a function of
.

 for

 for

11. Molecules  of  a  gas  in  a  container  are  moving  around  at  different  speeds.
 as a

Maxwell’s speed distribution law gives the probability distribution
function of temperature and speed:

P v

where M is the molar mass of the gas in kg/mol,
J/(mol K), is the
gas constant, T is the temperature in kelvins, and v is the molecule’s speed in
m/s.

8.31

R

=

Make a 3-D plot of

P v

 as a function of v and T for

m/s

and

K for oxygen (molar mass 0.032 kg/mol).

10.6 Problems

343

12. Plank’s  distribution  law  gives  the  black-
body emissive power (amount of radiation
energy  emitted)  as  a  function  of  tempera-
ture and wavelength:

W
----------------
m2 m

where

 W m4/m2,

  mK, T is the temperature in degrees K, and

length in  m. Make a 3-D plot (shown in the figure) of

 is the wave-
 as a function of
K. Use a logarithmic scale for

E

 (
. This can be done with the command: set(gca,'xscale','log').

m) and T for

13. Consider steady-state vibration of a fric-
tion-free  spring-mass-damper  system
subjected  to  harmonic  applied  force.
The  normalized  amplitude  of  the  mass
is given by:

  is  the  frequency  ratio,
where
and
 is the damping ratio. Make a 3-D
plot  (shown)  of  the  normalized  ampli-
tude  (z  axis)  as  a  function  of  the  fre-
quency  ratio
,  and  a
function  of  the  damping  ratio  for

for

.

14. An  RLC  circuit  with  an  alternating
voltage  source  is  shown.  The  source
by
voltage
vs
,
2 fd
dt
vm
vs
=
 is the driving frequency.
in which
The  amplitude  of  the  current,  I,  in
this circuit is given by:

is
,  where

given
=

sin
fd

d

8

6

4

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A
d
e
z

i
l

2

a
m
r
0
o
0.6N

0.4

0.2

Damping Ratio

00

2

1.5

1

0.5

Frequency Ratio

where  R  and  C  are  the  resistance  of  the  resistor  and  capacitance  of  the
capacitor,  respectively.  For  the  circuit
F,
vm

in  the  figure

H, and

24=

V.

(a) Make  a  3-D  plot  of  I  (z  axis)  as  a  function  of

  (x  axis)  for

d

344

Chapter 10: Three-Dimensional Plots

Hz, and as a function of R (y axis) for

..

(b) Make a plot that is a projection on the x z plane. Estimate from this plot
the  natural  frequency  of  the  circuit  (the  frequency  at  which  I  is  maxi-

mum). Compare the estimate with the calculated value of

.

15. In the solution of elasticity problem of a normal point load applied to the
surface of a half plane that was solved by Boussinesq in 1878, the stresses

 and

 are given by:

  and

where

  is  Poisson’s  ratio.  For

lb  and
, plot the stress components (each in a sep-
arate  figure)  as  a  function  of  r  and  z  in  the
domain
in. Plot the
coordinates  r  and  z  in  the  horizontal  plane  and
the stresses in the vertical direction.

 and

16. A high-pass filter passes signals with frequencies
that  are  higher  than  a  certain  cutoff  frequency.
In  this  filter  the  ratio  of  the  magnitudes  of  the
voltages is given by:

C

Vi

R

Vo

where

 is the frequency of the input signal.

(a) Make  a  3-D  mesh  plot  of

  (z  axis)  as  a  function  of  f  (x  axis)  for

Hz,

and

as

a

function  of  RC

(y

axis)

for

be

done

s.  Use  a  logarithmic  scale  for  the  x  axis.  This
can
command
the  MATLAB
set(gca,'Xscale','log') following the mesh command. A vec-
tor with constant spacing on a logarithmic scale can be created with the
command logspace(a,b,n).

typing

by

(b) Make a plot that is a projection on the x z plane.

17. The equation for the streamlines for uniform flow over a cylinder is

. Since
where
 is the stream function. For example, if
0=
the equation is satisfied for all x, the x axis is the zero (
) streamline.
Observe that the collection of points where
 is also a streamline.
Thus, the stream function above is for a cylinder of radius 1. Make a 2-D

, then
0=

y2+

1=

x2

10.6 Problems

345

contour plot of the streamlines around a cylinder with 1 in. radius. Set up
the domain for x and y to range between –3 and 3. Use 100 for the number
of contour levels. Add to the figure a plot of a circle with a radius of 1. Note
that MATLAB also plots  streamlines inside the  cylinder. This  is a mathe-
matical artifact.

18. The deflection w of a clamped circular membrane of radius

rd

 subjected to

pressure P is given by (small deformation theory):

where r is the radial coordinate, and

, where E, t, and

 are the

elastic  modulus,  thickness,  and  Poisson’s  ratio  of  the  membrane,  respec-
tively.  Consider  a  membrane  with
psi,
t

. Make a surface plot of the membrane.

in., and

15=

15=

psi,

in.,

0.08

rd

=

P

19. The Verhulst model, given in the following equation, describes the growth of
a  population  that  is  limited  by  various  factors  such  as  overcrowding  and
lack of resources:

N

 is the number of individuals in the population,

where
N t
population size,
ious limiting factors, and r is a rate constant. Make a surface plot of
versus  t and
and 100 and

 is the initial
 is the maximum population size possible due to the var-
N t
. Let  t vary between  0

 assuming
r
 between 100 and 1,000.

s–1, and

0.1=

10=

N
N

N0

N0

20. The geometry of a ship hull (Wigley
hull)  can  be  modeled  by  the  equa-
tion:

where  x,  y,  and  z  are  the  length,
width,  and  height,  respectively.  Use
MATLAB  to  make  a  3-D  figure  of
the  hull  as  shown.  Use
,
1.2=
L
0.5=

B
, and

4=

,

T

,

0

z

−0.2

−0.4

1

y

0

.

2

0

x

−1

−2

346

Chapter 10: Three-Dimensional Plots

21. The  stress  fields  near  a  crack  tip  of  a
linear  elastic  isotropic  material  for
mode II loading are given by:

=

ksi

300

For
KII
domain
horizontal plane, and the stresses in the vertical direction.

  plot  the  stresses  (each  in  a  separate  figure)  in  the
 in. Plot the coordinates x and y in the

 and

22. A  ball  thrown  up  falls  back  to  the  floor
and  bounces  many  times.  For  a  ball
thrown  up  in  the  direction  shown  in  the
figure,  the  position  of  the  ball  as  a  func-
tion of time is given by:

y

x

=

=

=

sin

cos

vxt

v0 cos

initial

velocity

vx
sin
the

vyt
The velocities in the x and y directions are
constants  throughout the  motion  and are
given  by
and
v0
.  In  the  vertical  z
v0
vy
=
sin
direction
is
, and when the ball impacts
vz
=
the floor its rebound velocity is 0.8 of the
vertical velocity at the start of the previous
bounce.  The  time  between  bounces  is
given by
 is the verti-
cal component of the velocity at the start
of the bounce. Make a 3-D plot (shown in
the figure) that shows the trajectory of the
ball during the first five bounces. Take

, where

vz

g

=

9.81

m/s2.

10

)

m

(

z

5

0
150

100
y (m)

50

0

0

100

50

x (m)

m/s,

30=

,

25=

, and

v0

20=

