382

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

216.40425613334451110398870215028 - 216.40425613334451110398870215028 exp(-0.23104906018664843647241070715273 t)

200

150

100

50

0

0

5

10

15

20

t

11.10 PROBLEMS

1. Define x as a symbolic variable and create the two symbolic expressions

 and

Use symbolic operations to determine the simplest form of each of the fol-
lowing expressions:

(a)

(b)

S1
-----
S2

(c)

(d) Use  the subs  command  to  evaluate  the  numerical  value  of  the  result

from part (c) for

x

7=

.

2. Define y as a symbolic variable and create the two symbolic expressions

 and

Use symbolic operations to determine the simplest form of each of the fol-
lowing expressions:

(a)

(b)

S1
-----
S2

(c)

(d) Use  the subs  command  to  evaluate  the  numerical  value  of  the  result

from part (c) for

x

6=

.

3. Define  x  and  y  as  symbolic  variables  and  create  the  two  symbolic  expres-

sions

 and

Use symbolic operations to determine the simplest form of
subs command to evaluate the numerical value of the result for
y

4=

.

. Use the
 and
5=

x

11.10 Problems

4. Define x as a symbolic variable.

(a) Derive the equation of the polynomial that has the roots
.

, and

,

383

,

,

(b) Determine the roots of the polynomial:

by using the factor command.

5. Use the commands from Section 11.2 to show that:

(a)

(b)

6. Use the commands from Section 11.2 to show that:

(a)

(b)

7.

In  rectangular  coordinates  the  equa-
tion of the hyperbola shown in the fig-
ure is given by:

(a) Use  MATLAB  to  show  that  in
parametric  form  the  equation  of
the hyperbola can be written as:

y

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

x2-y2-1 = 0

 and

-3

-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

0
x

(b) Make  a  plot  of  the  hyperbola  for

the domain shown in the figure by using the ezplot command.

8. A  water  tank  has  the  geometry  shown  in  the  figure  (the
upper section is a cylinder with radius r and height h, and
the lower section is a cone with radius  r and a height of
2r). Determine the radius r if
in. and the volume is
7,000 in.3. (Write an equation for the volume in terms of
the  radius  and  the  height.  Solve  the  equation  for  the
radius, and use the double command to obtain a numer-
ical value.)

20=

h

h

2r

r

9. The relation between the tension T and the steady shortening velocity v in a

muscle is given by the Hill equation:
b+

T a+

v

=

where a and b are positive constants and

T0
T0

a+ b
 is the isometric tension, i.e., the

384

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

tension  in  the  muscle  when
occurs when
T
(a) Using  symbolic  operations,  create  the  Hill  equation  as  a  symbolic
, and finally solve for v

.  The  maximum  shortening  velocity

0=

0=

0=

T

v

.

expression. Then use subs to substitute
to show that
vmax

.

(b) Use

 from part (a) to eliminate the constant b from the Hill equa-

tion, and show that

.

10. Consider the two ellipses in the x y plane given by the equations:

  and

(a) Use the ezplot command to plot the two ellipses in the same figure.
(b) Determine the coordinates of the points where the ellipses intersect.

11. A 120 in.-long beam AB is attached to the
wall with a pin at point A and to a 66 in.-
long  cable  CD.  A  load
lb  is
attached to the beam at point B. The ten-
sion in the cable T and the x and y compo-
nents of the force at A (
) can
 and
be calculated from the equations:

W 200
=

FAx

FAy

C

66 in.

A

D

B

d

L

W

where L and
is the distance from point A to point D where the cable is attached.

are the lengths of the beam and the cable, respectively, and d

Lc

(a) Use MATLAB to solve the equations for the forces T,

, and

 in

Lc

terms of d, L,

FA
(b) Use  the subs  command  to  substitu te

2+
FAy
in.,  and
in.  into  the  expressions  derived  in  part  (a).  This  will  give  the

FA
W 200
=

, and W. Determine

 given by

66=

lb,

120

L

=

Lc
forces as a function of the distance d.

(c) Use  the ezplot  command  to  plot  the  forces  T   and

FA

  (both  in  the

same figure as functions of d, for d starting at 20 and ending at 70 in.
(d) Determine the distance d where the tension in the cable is the smallest.

Determine the value of this force.

FAy
.

FAx
2
FAx
=

11.10 Problems

385

12. A box of mass m is being pulled by a rope
as  shown.  The  force  F  in  the  rope  as  a
function  of  x  can  be  calculated  from  the
equations:

F

h

x

m

where N and
and  surface,  respectively.  Consider  the  case  where
m/s2.

 are the normal force and friction coefficient between the box
m,

, and

18=

10=

kg,

9.81

0.55

m

=

=

h

g

(a) Use MATLAB to derive an expression for F, in terms of x, h, m, g, and

.

(b) Use the subs command to substitute

,
0.55
18=
m/s2  into  the  expressions  that  were  derived  in  part  (a).

10=

kg,

m,

m

=

h

g

=

and
This will give the force as a function of the distance x.

9.81

(c) Use the ezplot command to plot the force  F as a function of x, for x

starting at 5 and ending at 30 m.

(d) Determine the distance x where the force that is required to pull the box

is the smallest, and determine the magnitude of that force.

13. The mechanical power output P in a contracting muscle is given by:

where T is the muscle tension, v is the shortening velocity (max of
),
vmax T0
is the isometric tension (i.e., tension at zero velocity), and k is a nondimen-
sional constant that ranges between 0.15 and 0.25 for most muscles. The
equation can be written in nondimensional form:

, and

where
(a)  Plot p versus u for
(b)  Use differentiation to find the value of u where p is maximum.
(c)  Find the maximum value of p.

. Consider the case

=

k

.

0.25

.

386

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

14. The equation of a circle with its center is at
by

given

and

is

15

10

5

y

,  where  R

is  the
radius  of  the  circle.  Write  a  program  in  a
script  file  that  first  derives  the  equation
(symbolically) of the tangent line to the cir-
 on the upper part of
cle at the point
  and
the circle [i.e., for
].  Then  for  specific  values  of  R,
,
x0
 the program makes a plot, like the one shown on the right, of the cir-

and
cle and the tangent line. Execute the program with

R

9=

 and

.

x0 y0
,

y0

-10

-15

-10

0
x

15

10

-5

-5

5

0

15. A  tracking  radar  antenna  is  locked
on  an  airplane  flying  at  a  constant
altitude  of  5  km,  and  a  constant
speed  of  540  km/h.  The  airplane
travels  along  a  path  that  passes
exactly above the radar station. The
radar starts the tracking when the airplane is 100 km away.
(a) Derive an expression for the angle

 of the radar antenna as a function

of time.

(b) Derive an expression for the angular velocity of the antenna,

d
------
dt

, as a

function of time.

(c) Make two plots on the same page, one of   versus time and the other of

 versus time, where the angle is in degrees and the time is in minutes

d
------
dt
for

 min.

16. The parametric equations of an ellipsoid are:
,
y
cos
=
 and

a
x
=
where

usin

cos

v
.

sin

sin

=

,

u

b

c

v

z

v

Show  that  the  differential  volume  element  of  the

ellipsoid shown is given by:

Use MATLAB to evaluate the integral of dV from
 to 0 symbolically and show that the volume of the

ellipsoid is

V

=

4
--- abc
3

.

17. Evaluate the following indefinite integrals:

(a)

I =

(b)

z

c

dz

z

a

x

b

y

11.10 Problems

387

18. Define x as a symbolic variable and create the symbolic expression:

Plot S in the domain

 and calculate the integral

I

=

.

0

19. The one-dimensional diffusion equation is given by:

u
------
t

=

m

2u
---------
x2

Show that the following are solutions to the diffusion equation.

(a)

(b)

stants.

, where A and B are constants.

, where A, B, C, and

 are con-

20. A  ceramic  tile  has  the  design  shown  in  the
figure. The shaded area is painted red and the
rest  of  the  tile  is  white.  The  border  line
between  the  red  and  the  white  areas  follows
the equation:

12 in.

y

15 in.

Determine k such that the areas of the white
and the red colors will be the same.

21. Show  that  the  location  of  the  centroid

the  parabolic  sector  shown

  of
is  given  by

yc

3h
------=
5

yc
by:

. The coordinate

yc

 can be calculated

yc

=

y Ad
A
--------------
Ad

A

h
y=    x2
a2
h

y

dA

y

yc

y

h

x

dy

x

a

x

a

22. Consider  the  parabolic  sector  shown  in  the

previous problem. Show that the moment of inertia about the x axis,

Ix

, is

given by

. The moment of inertia

Ix

 can be calculated by:

Ix

=

y2 Ad

A

388

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

23. The rms value of an AC voltage is defined by:

where T is the period of the waveform.

(a) A  voltage  is  given  by

v t

=

V

cos

t

.  Show  that

vrms

=

V
-------
2

  and  is

independent of

. (The relationship between the period T and the radian

frequency

 is

T

2
------=

.)

(b) A voltage is given by

v t

=

2.5

cos

350t

3+

V. Determine

vrms

.

24. The  spread  of  an  infection  from  a  single  individual  to  a  population  of  N

uninfected persons can be described by the equation:

  with initial condition

x 0

N=

where x is the number of uninfected individuals and R is a positive rate con-
stant. Solve this differential equation symbolically for
. Also, determine
symbolically the time t at which the infection rate dx/dt is maximum.

x t

25. The Maxwell-Boltzmann probability density function

f v

 is given by:

where m (kg) is the mass of each molecule, v (m/s) is the speed, T (K) is the
temperature,  and
J/K  is  Boltzmann’s  constant.  The  most
 and can be
probable speed
vp

 corresponds to the maximum value of

f v

determined from

df v
-------------
dv

0=

. Create a symbolic expression for

f v

, differ-

entiate it with respect to v, and show that

vp

=

2kT
----------
m

. Calculate

vp

 for oxy-

gen molecules (
v for

300
m/s for oxygen molecules.

kg) at

=

T

K . Make a plot of

f v

 versus

26. The  velocity  of  a  skydiver  whose  parachute  is
still closed can be modeled by assuming that the
air  resistance  is  proportional  to  the  velocity.
From Newton’s second law of motion the rela-
tionship  between  the  mass  m  of  the  skydiver
and his velocity v is given by (down is positive):

where c is a drag constant and g is the gravitational constant (
s2).

g

=

9.81

m/

11.10 Problems

389

(a) Solve the equation for v in terms of m, g, c, and t, assuming that the ini-

tial velocity of the skydiver is zero.

(b) It is observed that 4 s after a 90-kg skydiver jumps out of an airplane, his

velocity is 28 m/s. Determine the constant c.

(c) Make a plot of the skydiver velocity as a function of time for

s.

t

i

L

L

=

0=

0.4=

R
0.08

) and an induc-
27. A resistor R (
tor  L  (
H)  are  connected  as
shown. Initially, the switch is connected
to point A and there is no current in the
circuit.  At
  the  switch  is  moved
from A to B, so that the resistor and the
inductor
vS
(
V),  and  current  starts  flowing  in  the  circuit.  The  switch  remains
vS
connected  to  B  until  the  voltage  on  the  resistor  reaches  5  V.  At  that  time
(
tBA

) the switch is moved back to A.
The current i in the circuit can be calculated from solving the differen-

connected

are

6=

vR

vS

to

A

B

R

tial equations:
di
-----
dt

vS=

iR L
+

  during  the  time  from

t

0=

  and  until  the  time  when  the

switch is moved back to A.

iR L
+

di
-----
dt

0=

from the time when the switch is moved back to A and on.

The voltage across the resistor,

vR

, at any time is given by

vR

iR=

.

(a) Derive  an  expression  for  the  current  i  in  terms  of  R,  L,

vS

,  and  t  for

 by solving the first differential equation.

(b) Substitute the values of R, L, and

vS
 when the voltage across the resistor reaches 5 V.

 in the solution for i, and determine

the time

tBA

(c) Derive an expression for the current i in terms of R, L, and t, for

by solving the second differential equation.
(d) Make  two  plots  (on  the  same  page),  one  for
.

and the other for

 versus t for

vR

vR

  versus  t  for

28. Determine the general solution of the differential equation:

dy
------
dx

=

ey

xcos

Show that the solution is correct. (Derive the first derivative of the solution,
and then substitute back into the equation.)

29. Determine  the  solution  of  the  following  differential  equation  that  satisfies

the given initial conditions. Plot the solution for

.

,

y 0

2=

,

dy
------
dx

x

0=

3=

390

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

30. The  current,  i,  in  a  series  RLC  circuit
when the switch is closed at
 can
be determined from the solution of the
2nd-order  ordinary  differential  equa-
tion (ODE):

0=

t

v = 10 V

t = 0

R

C

L

L

d2i
------- R
+
dt2

di
-----
dt

+

1
----i
C

0=

where  R,  L,  and  C  are  the  resistance  of  the  resistor,  the  inductance  of  the
inductor, and the capacitance of the capacitor, respectively.
(a) Solve  the  equation  for  i  in  terms  of  L,  R,  C,  and  t,  assuming  that  at

t

0=

,

i

0=

, and

/
di dt

8=

.

(c) Use  the subs  command  to  substi tute

(b) Use  the  subs  command  to  substitute

,  and
 into the expression that was derived in part (a). Make a plot

10=

3=

H,

R

L

F

80=

C
of i versus t for

=

1200

C
plot of i versus t for

F

=

300

C
plot of i versus t for

F

s. (Underdamped response.)

H,

3=

,  and
L
 into the expression that was derived in part (a). Make a
s. (Overdamped response.)
R

,  and
  into  the  expression  that  was  derived  in  part  (a).  Make  a

3=

H,

200

201

R

=

=

L

s. (Critically damped response.)

(d) Use  the subs  command  to  substi tute

31. Damped  free  vibrations  can  be
modeled  by  a  block  of  mass  m
that is attached to a spring and a
dashpot  as  shown.  From  New-
ton’s  second  law  of  motion,  the
displacement  x  of  the  mass  as  a
function of time can be determined by solving the differential equation:

m

d2x
---------
dt2

+

c

dx
------
dt

+

kx

0=

where k is the spring constant and c is the damping coefficient of the dash-
pot. If the mass is displaced from its equilibrium position and then released,
it will start oscillating back and forth. The nature of the oscillations depends
on the size of the mass and the values of k and c.

t

0=

  the  mass  is  displaced  to

For  the  system  shown  in  the  figure,

N/m.  At
time
m  and  then  released  from
rest.  Derive  expressions  for  the  displacement  x  and  the  velocity  v  of  the
mass, as a function of time. Consider the following two cases:
(a)

(N s)/m.

(N s)/m.

kg  and

10=

28=

50=

0.18

3=

(b)

m

=

x

k

c

c

For each case, plot the position x and the velocity v versus time (two plots
on one page). For case (a) take
s.

s, and for case (b) take

