348

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

can  also  be  used  as  separate  independent  software.  That  software  uses  the
MuPAD  language,  which  has  a  completely  different  structure  and  commands
than MATLAB. The Symbolic Math Toolbox is included in the student version
of MATLAB. In the standard version, the toolbox is purchased separately. To
check  if  the  Symbolic  Math  Toolbox  is  installed  on  a  computer,  the  user  can
type the command ver in the Command Window. In response, MATLAB dis-
plays information about the version that is used as well as a list of the toolboxes
that are installed.

The  starting  point  for  symbolic  operations  is  symbolic  objects.  Symbolic
objects  are  made  of  variables  and  numbers  that,  when  used  in  mathematical
expressions, tell MATLAB to execute the expression symbolically. Typically, the
user first defines (creates) the symbolic variables (objects) that are needed, and
then  uses  them  to  create  symbolic  expressions  that  are  subsequently  used  in
symbolic operations. If needed, symbolic expressions can be used in numerical
operations

The  first  section  in  this  chapter  describes  how  to  define  symbolic  objects
and how to use them to create symbolic expressions. The second section shows
how to change the form of existing expressions. Once a symbolic expression has
been created, it can be used in mathematical operations. MATLAB has a large
selection  of  functions  for  this  purpose.  The  next  four  sections  (11.3–11.6)
describe how to use MATLAB to solve algebraic equations, to carry out differ-
entiation and integration, and to solve differential equations. Section 11.7 cov-
ers  plotting  symbolic  expressions.  How  to  use  symbolic  expressions  in
subsequent numerical calculations is explained in the following section.

11.1 SYMBOLIC OBJECTS AND SYMBOLIC EXPRESSIONS

A symbolic object can be a variable (without a preassigned numerical value), a
number, or an expression made of symbolic variables and numbers. A symbolic
expression  is  a  mathematical  expression  containing  one  or  more  symbolic
objects. When typed, a symbolic expression may look like a standard numerical
expression. However, because the expression contains symbolic objects, it is exe-
cuted by MATLAB symbolically.

11.1.1 Creating Symbolic Objects

Symbolic objects can be variables or numbers. They can be created with the sym
and/or syms commands. A single symbolic object can be created with the sym
command:

object_name = sym(‘string’)

where the string, which is the symbolic object, is assigned to a name. The string
can be:
• A single letter or a combination of several letters (no spaces). Examples: ‘a’,

‘x’, ‘yad’.

11.1 Symbolic Objects and Symbolic Expressions

349

• A  combination  of  letters  and  digits  starting  with  a  letter  and  with  no  spaces

Examples: ‘xh12’,‘r2d2’.

• A number. Examples: ‘15’, ‘4’.

In the first two cases (where the string is a single letter, a combination of several
letters, or a combination of letters and digits), the symbolic object is a symbolic
variable. In this case it is convenient (but not necessary) to give the object the
same name as the string. For example, a, bb, and x, can be defined as symbolic
variables as follows:

>> a=sym('a')

Create a symbolic object a and assign it to a.

a =
a

>> bb=sym('bb')

bb =
bb

The display of a symbolic
object is not indented.

>> x=sym('x');
>>

The symbolic variable x is created but not displayed,
since a semicolon is typed at the end of the command.

The name of the symbolic object can be different from the name of the variable.
For example:

>> g=sym('gamma')

g =
gamma

The symbolic object is gamma, and
the name of the object is g.

As  mentioned,  symbolic  objects  can  also  be  numbers.  The  numbers  don’t
have to be typed as strings. For example, the sym command is used next to cre-
ate symbolic objects from the numbers 5 and 7 and assign them to the variables
c and d, respectively.

>> c=sym(5)

Create a symbolic object from the number 5 and assign it to c.

c =
5

>> d=sym(7)

d =
7

The display of a symbolic
object is not indented.

As shown, when a symbolic object is created and a semicolon is not typed at the
end of the command, MATLAB displays the name of the object and the object
itself in the next two lines. The display of symbolic objects starts at the begin-
ning of the line and is not indented as is the display of numerical variables. The
difference is illustrated below, where a numerical variable is created.

