362

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

first solution has the output in a cell array:

>> syms x y R

The two equations are typed in the solve command.

>> [xc,yc]=solve('(x-2)^2+(y-4)^2=R^2','y=x/2+1')

Output in a cell array.

xc =
((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2) + 14/5
 14/5 - ((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2)
yc =
((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2)/2 + 12/5
 12/5 - ((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2)/2

Output in a cell array
with two cells named xc
and yc. Each cell con-
tains two solutions in a
symbolic column vector.

The second solution has the output in a structure:

>> COORD=solve('(x-2)^2+(y-4)^2=R^2','y = x/2+1')

Output in a structure.

COORD =
    x: [2x1 sym]
    y: [2x1 sym]

Output in a structure named COORD that has two
fields, x and y. Each field is a 2 by 1 symbolic vector.

>> COORD.x
ans =
((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2) + 14/5
14/5 - ((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2)

>> COORD.y
ans =
((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2)/2 + 12/5
12/5 - ((4*R^2)/5 - 64/25)^(1/2)/2

Type the address of the field x.

The content of the field (the
solution for x) is displayed.

Type the address of the field y.

The content of the field (the
solution for y) is displayed.

11.4 DIFFERENTIATION

Symbolic differentiation can be carried out by using the diff command. The
form of the command is:

diff(S)

or

diff(S,var)

• Either  S  can  be  the  name  of  a  previously  created  symbolic  expression,  or  an

expression can be typed in for S.

•

In  the  diff(S)  command,  if  the  expression  contains  one  symbolic  variable,
the differentiation is carried out with respect to that variable. If the expression
contains more than one variable, the differentiation is carried out with respect to
the default symbolic variable (Section 11.1.3).

11.5 Integration

363

•

In  the  diff(S,var)  command  (which  is  used  for  differentiation  of  expres-
sions  with  several  symbolic  variables)  the  differentiation  is  carried  out  with
respect to the variable var.

• The second or higher (nth) derivative can be determined with the diff(S,n)
or diff(S,var,n) command, where n is a positive number. n = 2 for the sec-
ond derivative, n = 3 for the third, and so on.

Some examples are:

>> syms x y t

>> S=exp(x^4);

>> diff(S)

ans =
4*x^3*exp(x^4)

Define x, y, and t as symbolic variables.
ex4
.
Use the diff(S)command to differentiate S.

Assign to S the expression

The answer

4x3ex4

 is displayed.

>> diff((1-4*x)^3)

Use the diff(S)command to differentiate

.

ans =
-12*(1-4*x)^2

>> R=5*y^2*cos(3*t);

>> diff(R)

ans =
10*y*cos(3*t)

>> diff(R,t)

ans =
-15*y^2*sin(3*t)

The answer

 is displayed.

Assign to R the expression

.
Use the diff(R)command to differentiate R.

5y2

cos

3t

MATLAB differentiates R with respect to y (default
symbolic variable); the answer

 is displayed.

10y

cos

3t

Use the diff(R,t)command to differentiate R w.r.t. t.

The answer

 is displayed.

>> diff(S,2)

Use diff(S,2)command to obtain the second derivative of S.

ans =
12*x^2*exp(x^4)+16*x^6*exp(x^4)

The answer
is displayed.

12x2ex4

+

16x6ex4

•

It is also possible to use the diff command by typing the expression to be dif-
ferentiated as a string directly in the command without having the variables in
the expression first created as symbolic objects. However, the variables in the dif-
ferentiated expression do not exist as independent symbolic objects.

11.5 INTEGRATION

Symbolic integration can be carried out by using the int command. The com-
mand can be used for determining indefinite integrals (antiderivatives) and defi-
nite integrals. For indefinite integration the form of the command is:

int(S)

or

int(S,var)

