11.5 Integration

363

•

In  the  diff(S,var)  command  (which  is  used  for  differentiation  of  expres-
sions  with  several  symbolic  variables)  the  differentiation  is  carried  out  with
respect to the variable var.

• The second or higher (nth) derivative can be determined with the diff(S,n)
or diff(S,var,n) command, where n is a positive number. n = 2 for the sec-
ond derivative, n = 3 for the third, and so on.

Some examples are:

>> syms x y t

>> S=exp(x^4);

>> diff(S)

ans =
4*x^3*exp(x^4)

Define x, y, and t as symbolic variables.
ex4
.
Use the diff(S)command to differentiate S.

Assign to S the expression

The answer

4x3ex4

 is displayed.

>> diff((1-4*x)^3)

Use the diff(S)command to differentiate

.

ans =
-12*(1-4*x)^2

>> R=5*y^2*cos(3*t);

>> diff(R)

ans =
10*y*cos(3*t)

>> diff(R,t)

ans =
-15*y^2*sin(3*t)

The answer

 is displayed.

Assign to R the expression

.
Use the diff(R)command to differentiate R.

5y2

cos

3t

MATLAB differentiates R with respect to y (default
symbolic variable); the answer

 is displayed.

10y

cos

3t

Use the diff(R,t)command to differentiate R w.r.t. t.

The answer

 is displayed.

>> diff(S,2)

Use diff(S,2)command to obtain the second derivative of S.

ans =
12*x^2*exp(x^4)+16*x^6*exp(x^4)

The answer
is displayed.

12x2ex4

+

16x6ex4

•

It is also possible to use the diff command by typing the expression to be dif-
ferentiated as a string directly in the command without having the variables in
the expression first created as symbolic objects. However, the variables in the dif-
ferentiated expression do not exist as independent symbolic objects.

11.5 INTEGRATION

Symbolic integration can be carried out by using the int command. The com-
mand can be used for determining indefinite integrals (antiderivatives) and defi-
nite integrals. For indefinite integration the form of the command is:

int(S)

or

int(S,var)

364

Chapter 11: Symbolic Math

• Either  S  can  be  the  name  of  a  previously  created  symbolic  expression,  or  an

expression can be typed in for S.

•

•

In the int(S) command, if the expression contains one symbolic variable, the
integration is carried out with respect to that variable. If the expression contains
more than one variable, the integration is carried out with respect to the default
symbolic variable (Section 11.1.3).

In  the  int(S,var)  command,  which  is  used  for  integration  of  expressions
with several symbolic variables, the integration is carried out with respect to the
variable var.

Some examples are:

>> syms x y t

>> S=2*cos(x)-6*x;

>> int(S)

ans =
2*sin(x)-3*x^2

Define x, y, and t as symbolic variables.

Assign to S the expression
Use the int(S)command to integrate S.

.

The answer

 is displayed.

>> int(x*sin(x))

Use the int(S)command to integrate

x

sin

x

.

ans =
sin(x)-x*cos(x)

The answer

 is displayed.

>>R=5*y^2*cos(4*t);

Assign to R the expression

5y2

cos

4t

.

>> int(R)

ans =
(5*y^3*cos(4*t))/3

>> int(R,t)

Use the int(R)command to integrate R.
MATLAB integrates R with respect to y (default sym-
bolic variable); the answer

 is displayed.

Use the int(R,t)command to integrate R w.r.t. t.

ans =
(5*y^2*sin(4*t))/4

The answer

 is displayed.

For definite integration the form of the command is:

int(S,a,b)

or

int(S,var,a,b)

• a  and  b  are  the  limits  of  integration.  The  limits  can  be  numbers  or  symbolic

variables.

For  example,  determination  of  the  definite  integral

  with

0

MATLAB is:

>> syms y

>> int(sin(y)-5*y^2,0,pi)

ans =
2 - (5*pi^3)/3

