2.10 Strings and Strings as Variables

53

A =
     2     5     5    10    15    20
     3     6     9    12    15    18
     4     7    30    35    40    45
     5     8    95    94    93    92
     6     9    60    65    70    75

2.10 STRINGS AND STRINGS AS VARIABLES

• A string is an array of characters. It is created by typing the characters within

single quotes.

• Strings can include letters, digits, other symbols, and spaces.

• Examples of strings:  'ad ef ',  '3%fr2',  '{edcba:21!', 'MATLAB'.

• A  string  that  contains  a  single  quote  is  created  by  typing  two  single  quotes

within the string.

• When a string is being typed in, the color of the text on the screen changes to
maroon when the first single quote is typed. When the single quote at the end of
the string is typed, the color of the string changes to purple.

Strings  have  several  different  uses  in  MATLAB.  They  are  used  in  output
commands  to  display  text  messages  (Chapter  4),  in  formatting  commands  of
plots (Chapter 5), and as input arguments of some functions (Chapter 7). More
details are given in these chapters when strings are used for these purposes.
• When  strings  are  being  used  in  formatting  plots  (labels  to  axes,  title,  and  text
notes),  characters  within  the  string  can  be  formatted  to  have  a  specified  font,
size, position (uppercase, lowercase), color, etc. See Chapter 5 for details.

Strings can also be assigned to variables by simply typing the string on the

right side of the assignment operator, as shown in the examples below:

>> a='FRty 8'

a =
FRty 8

>> B='My name is John Smith'

B =
My name is John Smith
>>

When a variable is defined as a string, the characters of the string are stored
in an array just as numbers are. Each character, including a space, is an element
in the array. This means that a one-line string is a row vector in which the num-
ber of elements is equal to the number of characters. The elements of the vectors
are addressed by position. For example, in the vector B that was defined above

54

Chapter 2: Creating Arrays

the 4th element is the letter n, the 12th element is J, and so on.

>> B(4)
ans =
n
>> B(12)
ans =
J

As with a vector that contains numbers, it is also possible to change specific
elements  by  addressing  them  directly.  For  example,  in  the  vector  B  above  the
name John can be changed to Bill by:

>> B(12:15)='Bill'

B =
My name is Bill Smith
>>

Using a colon to assign new char-
acters to elements 12 through 15 in
the vector B.

Strings can also be placed in a matrix. As with numbers, this is done by typ-
ing a semicolon  ;  (or pressing the Enter key) at the end of each row. Each row
must be typed as a string, which means that it must be enclosed in single quotes.
In addition, as with a numerical matrix, all rows must have the same number of
elements. This requirement can cause problems when the intention is to create
rows with specific wording. Rows can be made to have the same number of ele-
ments by adding spaces.

MATLAB  has  a  built-in  function  named  char  that  creates  an  array  with
rows having the same number of characters from an input of rows not all of the
same length. MATLAB makes the length of all the rows equal to that of the lon-
gest row by adding spaces at the end of the short lines. In the char function, the
rows are entered as strings separated by a comma according to the following for-
mat:

variable_name = char('string 1','string 2','string 3')

For example:

>> Info=char('Student Name:','John Smith','Grade:','A+')

Info =
Student Name:
John Smith
Grade:
A+
>>

A variable named Info is assigned four rows
of strings, each with different length.

The function char creates an array with four rows
with the same length as the longest row by adding
empty spaces to the shorter lines.

