2.3 Notes About Variables in MATLAB

41

ne =
     1     1     1
     1     1     1
     1     1     1
     1     1     1
>> idn=eye(5)
idn =
     1     0     0     0     0
     0     1     0     0     0
     0     0     1     0     0
     0     0     0     1     0
     0     0     0     0     1
>>

Matrices  can  also  be  created  as  a  result  of  mathematical  operations  with

vectors and matrices. This topic is covered in Chapter 3.

2.3 NOTES ABOUT VARIABLES IN MATLAB

• All variables in MATLAB are arrays. A scalar is an array with one element, a
vector is an array with one row or one column of elements, and a matrix is an
array with elements in rows and columns.

• The variable (scalar, vector, or matrix) is defined by the input when the variable
is assigned. There is no need to define the size of the array (single element for a
scalar, a row or a column of elements for a vector, or a two-dimensional array of
elements for a matrix) before the elements are assigned.

• Once a variable exists—as a scalar, vector, or matrix—it can be changed to any
other size, or type, of variable. For example, a scalar can be changed to a vector
or a matrix; a vector can be changed to a scalar, a vector of different length, or a
matrix; and a matrix can be changed to have a different size, or be reduced to a
vector or a scalar. These changes are made by adding or deleting elements. This
subject is covered in Sections 2.7 and 2.8.

2.4 THE TRANSPOSE OPERATOR

The transpose operator, when applied to a vector, switches a row (column) vec-
tor  to  a  column  (row)  vector.  When  applied  to  a  matrix,  it  switches  the  rows
(columns) to columns (rows). The transpose operator is applied by typing a sin-
gle quote  ’ following the variable to be transposed. Examples are:

>> aa=[3  8  1]

aa =
     3     8     1

>> bb=aa'

Define a row vector aa.

Define a column vector bb as
the transpose of vector aa.

