3.2 Array Multiplication

65

When a scalar (number) is added to (or subtracted from) an array, the scalar

is added to (or subtracted from) all the elements of the array. Examples are:

>> VectA=[1 5 8 -10 2]
VectA =
     1     5     8   -10     2

>> VectA+4

Define a vector named VectA.

Add the scalar 4 to VectA.

ans =
     5     9    12    -6     6

4 is added to each element of VectA.

>> A=[6 21 -15; 0 -4 8]

Define a

 matrix A.

A =
     6    21   -15
     0    -4     8

>> A-5
ans =
     1    16   -20
    -5    -9     3

Subtract the scalar 5 from A.

5 is subtracted from each element of A.

3.2 ARRAY MULTIPLICATION

The multiplication operation  *  is executed by MATLAB according to the rules
of  linear  algebra.  This  means  that  if  A  and  B  are  two  matrices,  the  operation
A*B can be carried out only if the number of columns in matrix A is equal to the
number of rows in matrix B. The result is a matrix that has the same number of
rows as A and the same number of columns as B. For example, if A is a
matrix and B is a

 matrix:

  and

then the matrix that is obtained with the operation A*B has dimensions
with the elements:

A numerical example is:

66

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

The product of the multiplication of two square matrices (they must be of
the same size) is a square matrix of the same size. However, the multiplication of
matrices is not commutative. This means that if A and B are both
, then
.  Also,  the  power  operation  can  be  executed  only  with  a  square
matrix (since A*A can be carried out only if the number of columns in the first
matrix is equal to the number of rows in the second matrix).

Two  vectors  can  be  multiplied  only  if  they  have  the  same  number  of  ele-
ments, and one is a row vector and the other is a column vector. The multiplica-
 matrix, which is a scalar.
tion of a row vector by a column vector gives a
This is the dot product of two vectors. (MATLAB also has a built-in function,
dot(a,b), that computes the dot product of two vectors.) When using the dot
function, the vectors a and b can each be a row vector or a column vector (see
Table 3-1). The multiplication of a column vector by a row vector, each with n
elements, gives an
 matrix Multiplication of array is demonstrated in Tuto-
rial 3-1.

Tutorial 3-1: Multiplication of arrays.

>> A=[1 4 2; 5 7 3; 9 1 6; 4 2 8]

A =
     1     4     2
     5     7     3
     9     1     6
     4     2     8

Define a

 matrix A.

>> B=[6 1; 2 5; 7 3]

Define a

 matrix B.

B =
     6     1
     2     5
     7     3

>> C=A*B

C =
    28    27
    65    49
    98    32
    84    38

>> F=[1 3; 5 7]

F =
     1     3
     5     7

>> G=[4 2; 1 6]

Multiply matrix A by matrix B and assign
the result to variable C.

>> D=B*A
??? Error using ==> *
Inner matrix dimensions must agree.

Trying to multiply B by A,
B*A, gives an error since
the number of columns in
B is 2 and the number of
rows in A is 4.

Define two

 matrices F and G.

3.2 Array Multiplication

67

Tutorial 3-1: Multiplication of arrays. (Continued)

G =
     4     2
     1     6

>> F*G

ans =
     7    20
    27    52

>> G*F

ans =
    14    26
    31    45

>> AV=[2 5 1]

AV =
     2     5     1

>> BV=[3; 1; 4]

BV =
     3
     1
     4

>> AV*BV

ans =
    15

>> BV*AV

ans =
     6    15     3
     2     5     1
     8    20     4
>>

Multiply F*G

Multiply G*F

Note that the answer for G*F is not the
same as the answer for F*G.

Define a three-element row vector AV.

Define a three-element column vector BV.

Multiply AV by BV. The answer is a scalar.
(Dot product of two vectors.)

Multiply BV by AV. The
 matrix.
answer is a

When an array is multiplied by a number (actually a number is a
each element in the array is multiplied by the number. For example:

 array),

>> A=[2 5 7 0; 10 1 3 4; 6 2 11 5]

Define a

 matrix A.

A =
     2     5     7     0
    10     1     3     4
     6     2    11     5

>> b=3

b =
     3

Assign the number 3 to the variable b.

