68

>> b*A

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

Multiply the matrix A by b. This can be
done by either typing b*A or A*b.

ans =
     6    15    21     0
    30     3     9    12
    18     6    33    15

>> C=A*5

C =
    10    25    35     0
    50     5    15    20
    30    10    55    25

Multiply the matrix A by 5 and assign
the result to a new variable C. (Typing
C=5*A gives the same result.)

Linear  algebra  rules  of  array  multiplication  provide  a  convenient  way  for
writing a system of linear equations. For example, the system of three equations
with three unknowns

can be written in a matrix form as:

and in matrix notation as

AX = B  where

,

, and

.

3.3 ARRAY DIVISION

The division operation is also associated with the rules of linear algebra. This
operation is more complex, and only a brief explanation is given below. A full
explanation can be found in books on linear algebra.

The division operation can be explained with the help of the identity matrix

and the inverse operation.

Identity matrix:

The identity matrix is a square matrix in which the diagonal elements are 1s and
the rest of the elements are 0s. As was shown in Section 2.2.1, an identity matrix
can be created in MATLAB with the eye command. When the identity matrix
multiplies another matrix (or vector), that matrix (or vector) is unchanged (the

3.3 Array Division

69

multiplication has to be done according to the rules of linear algebra). This is
equivalent to multiplying a scalar by 1. For example:

   or

  or

If a matrix A is square, it can be multiplied by the identity matrix, I, from the left
or from the right:

AI = IA = A

Inverse of a matrix:

The matrix B is the inverse of the matrix A if, when the two matrices are multi-
plied, the product is the identity matrix. Both matrices must be square, and the
multiplication order can be BA or AB.

Obviously B is the inverse of A, and A is the inverse of B. For example:

BA = AB = I

The inverse of a matrix A is typically written as A-1. In MATLAB the inverse of
a matrix can be obtained either by raising A to the power of –1, A^-1, or with
the inv(A) function. Multiplying the matrices above with MATLAB is shown
below.

>> A=[2 1 4; 4 1 8; 2 -1 3]

Creating the matrix A.

A =
     2     1     4
     4     1     8
     2    -1     3

>> B=inv(A)

B =
    5.5000   -3.5000    2.0000
    2.0000   -1.0000         0
   -3.0000    2.0000   -1.0000

Use the inv function to find the
inverse of A and assign it to B.

>> A*B

Multiplication of A and B gives the identity matrix.

ans =
     1     0     0
     0     1     0
     0     0     1

70

Chapter 3: Mathematical Operations with Arrays

>> A*A^-1

ans =
     1     0     0
     0     1     0
     0     0     1

Use  the  power  –1  to  find  the  inverse  of  A.
Multiplying it by A gives the identity matrix.

Not every matrix has an inverse. A matrix has an inverse only if it is square and
its determinant is not equal to zero.
Determinants:

A determinant is a function associated with square matrices. A short review on
determinants is given below. For a more detailed coverage refer to books on lin-
ear algebra.

The determinant is a function that associates with each square matrix A a
number,  called  the  determinant  of  the  matrix.  The  determinant  is  typically
denoted  by  det(A)  or  |A|.  The  determinant  is  calculated  according  to  specific
 matrix, the rule is:
rules. For a second-order

,  for example,

The determinant of a square matrix can be calculated with the det command
(see Table 3-1).

Array division:

MATLAB has two types of array division, right division and left division.

Left division, \ :

Left division is used to solve the matrix equation
. In this equation X
and B are column vectors. This equation can be solved by multiplying, on the
left, both sides by the inverse of A:

The left-hand side of this equation is X, since

So the solution of

 is:

In MATLAB the last equation can be written by using the left division charac-
ter:

X = A\B
It should be pointed out here that although the last two operations appear to
give the same result, the method by which MATLAB calculates X is different. In
the first, MATLAB calculates
 and then uses it to multiply B. In the second
(left  division),  the  solution  X  is  obtained  numerically  using  a  method  that  is
based on Gauss elimination. The left division method is recommended for solv-

3.3 Array Division

71

ing a set of linear equations, because the calculation of the inverse may be less
accurate than the Gauss elimination method when large matrices are involved.

Right division, / :

. In this equation
The right division is used to solve the matrix equation
X  and  D  are  row  vectors.  This  equation  can  be  solved  by  multiplying,  on  the
right, both sides by the inverse of C:

which gives

In MATLAB the last equation can be written using the right division character:

The following example demonstrates the use of the left and right division,

and the inv function to solve a set of linear equations.

X = D/C

Sample Problem 3-1: Solving three linear equations (array division)

Use matrix operations to solve the following system of linear equations.

Solution

Using the rules of linear algebra demonstrated earlier, the above system of equa-
tions can be written in the matrix form AX=B or in the form XC=D:

     or

Solutions for both forms are shown below:

>> A=[4 -2 6; 2 8 2; 6 10 3];

Solving the form AX = B.

>> B=[8; 4; 0];

>> X=A\B
X =
   -1.8049
    0.2927
    2.6341

Solving by using left division: X = A \ B.

>> Xb=inv(A)*B

Solving by using the inverse of A: X=A-1B.

Xb =
   -1.8049
    0.2927
    2.6341

