4.3 Output Commands

101

dow, in a script file, and, as will be shown later, in a function file. When these
commands are used in a script file, the display output that they generate is dis-
played in the Command Window.

4.3.1 The disp Command

The disp command is used to display the elements of a variable without dis-
playing the name of the variable, and to display text. The format of the disp
command is:

disp(name of a variable) or   disp(‘text as string’)

• Every time the disp command is executed, the display it generates appears in a

new line. One example is:

>> abc = [5  9  1;  7  2  4];

A

 array is assigned to variable abc.

>> disp(abc)

The disp command is used to display the abc array.

     5     9     1
     7     2     4

The array is displayed without its name.

>> disp('The problem has no solution.')

The problem has no solution.
>>

The disp command is used
to display a message.

The next example shows the use of the disp command in the script file that cal-
culates the average points scored in three games.

% This script file calculates the average points scored in
three games.

% The points from each game are assigned to the variables by

% using the input command.

% The disp command is used to display the output.

game1=input('Enter the points scored in the first game    ');

game2=input('Enter the points scored in the second game   ');

game3=input('Enter the points scored in the third game    ');

ave_points=(game1+game2+game3)/3;

disp(' ')

Display empty line.

disp('The average of points scored in a game is:')

Display text.
Display empty line.

disp(' ')

disp(ave_points)

Display the value of the variable ave_points.

102

Chapter 4: Using Script Files and Managing Data

When this file (saved as Chapter4Example5) is executed, the display in the

Command Window is:

>> Chapter4Example5

Enter the points scored in the first game    89

Enter the points scored in the second game   60

Enter the points scored in the third game    82

The average of points scored in a game is:

An empty line is displayed.
The text line is displayed.
An empty line is displayed.
The value of the variable ave_points is displayed.

   77

• Only one variable can be displayed in a disp command. If elements of two vari-
ables need to be displayed together, a new variable (that contains the elements to
be displayed) must first be defined and then displayed.

In many situations it is nice to display output (numbers) in a table. This can
be done by first defining a variable that is an array with the numbers and then
using  the  disp  command  to  display  the  array.  Headings  to  the  columns  can
also be created with the disp command. Since in the disp command the user
cannot control the format (the width of the columns and the distance between
the columns) of the display of the array, the position of the headings has to be
aligned with the columns by adding spaces. As an example, the script file below
shows how to display the population data from Chapter 2 in a table.

yr=[1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996];

pop=[127 130 136 145 158 178 211];

The population data is
entered in two row vectors.

tableYP(:,1)=yr';

tableYP(:,2)=pop';

yr is entered as the first column in the array tableYP.
pop is entered as the second column in the array tableYP.

disp('        YEAR     POPULATION')

disp('                 (MILLIONS)')

disp(' ')

disp(tableYP)

Display heading (first line).
Display heading (second line).

Display an empty line.

Display the array tableYP.

When  this  script  file  (saved  as  PopTable)  is  executed,  the  display  in  the  Com-
mand Window is:

>> PopTable

        YEAR     POPULATION
                 (MILLIONS)

        1984        127

Headings are displayed.

An empty line is displayed.

