4.4  The save and load Commands

111

4.4 THE save AND load COMMANDS

The save and load commands are most useful for saving and retrieving data
for use in MATLAB. The save command can be used for saving the variables
that are currently in the workspace, and the load command is used for retriev-
ing variables that have been previously saved, to the workspace. The workspace
can  be  saved  when  MATLAB  is  used  in  one  type  of  platform  (e.g.,  PC),  and
retrieved for use in MATLAB in another platform (e.g., Mac). The save and
load commands can also be used for exchanging data with applications outside
MATLAB.  Additional  commands  that  can  be  used  for  this  purpose  are  pre-
sented in Section 4.5.

4.4.1 The save Command

The save command is used for saving the variables (all or some of them) that
are stored in the workspace. The two simplest forms of the save command are:

save file_name

and

save(‘file_name’)

When either one of these commands is executed, all of the variables currently in
the workspace are saved in a file named file_name.mat that is created in the
current directory. In mat files, which are written in a binary format, each vari-
able preserves its name, type, size, and value. These files cannot be read by other
applications. The save command can also be used for saving only some of the
variables that are in the workspace. For example, to save two variables named
var1 and var2, the command is:

save file_name var1 var2

or

save(‘file_name’,‘var1’,‘var2’)

The  save  command  can  also  be  used  for  saving  in  ASCII  format,  which
can be read by applications outside MATLAB. Saving in ASCII format is done
by  adding  the  argument  -ascii  in  the  command  (for  example,  save
file_name -ascii). In the ASCII format the variable’s name, type, and size
are not preserved. The data is saved as characters separated by spaces but with-
out the variable names. For example, the following shows how two variables (a
 matrix) are defined in the Command Window and then

 vector and a

saved in ASCII format to a file named DatSavAsci:

>> V=[3 16 -4 7.3];

Create a

 vector V.

>> A=[6 -2.1 15.5; -6.1 8 11];

>> save -ascii DatSavAsci

Create a
Save variables to a file named DatSavAsci.

 matrix A.

