5.10 Putting Multiple Plots on the Same Page

157

For  example,  a  plot  of  the  function

r

=

3

cos2

0.5

+

  for

  is

shown below.

t=linspace(0,2*pi,200);
r=3*cos(0.5*t).^2+t;
polar(t,r)

5.10 PUTTING MULTIPLE PLOTS ON THE SAME PAGE

Multiple plots can be created on the same page with the subplot command,
which has the form:

subplot(m,n,p)

m n

(3,2,1)

(3,2,2)

m n

m n

The  command  divides  the  Figure  Window
(and the page when printed) into
 rectan-
gular  subplots.  The  subplots  are  arranged  like
elements in an
 matrix where each element
is a subplot. The subplots are numbered from 1
through
.  The  upper  left  subplot  is  num-
bered 1, and the lower right subplot is numbered
m n
.  The  numbers  increase  from  left  to  right
within a row, from the first row to the last. The
command  subplot(m,n,p)  makes  the  sub-
plot  p  current.  This  means  that  the  next  plot
command  (and  any  formatting  commands)  will
create a plot (with the corresponding format) in this subplot. For example, the
command subplot(3,2,1) creates six areas arranged in three rows and two
columns  as  shown,  and  makes  the  upper  left  subplot  current.  An  example  of
using the subplot command is shown in the solution of Sample Problem 5-2.

(3,2,5)

(3,2,6)

(3,2,4)

(3,2,3)

5.11 MULTIPLE FIGURE WINDOWS

When plot or any other command that generates a plot is executed, the Figure
Window opens (if not already open) and displays the plot. MATLAB labels the
Figure Window as Figure 1 (see the top left corner of the Figure Window that is
displayed in Figure 5-4). If the Figure Window is already open when the plot
or any other command that generates a plot is executed, a new plot is displayed
in  the  Figure  Window  (replacing  the  existing  plot).  Commands  that  format

