5.12 Plotting Using the Plots Toolstrip

159

5.12 PLOTTING USING THE PLOTS TOOLSTRIP

Plots can also be constructed interactively by using the PLOTS Toolstrip in the
Command Window. The PLOTS Toolstrip, as shown in Fig. 5-13, is displayed
when the PLOTS tab is selected. To make a two-dimensional plot, the vectors
with the data points that will be used for the plot have to be already assigned
and  displayed  in  the  Workspace  Window  (see  Section  4.1).  To  make  a  plot,
select  a  variable  in  the  Workspace  Window  and  then,  holding  the  CTRL  key,
select  any  additional  variables  needed.  Once  a  selection  of  variables  has  been
made, the Toolstrip shows icons with images of plot types that can be created
with  the  selected  variables  (e.g.  line  graph,  scatter  plot,  bar  graph,  pie  chart,
etc.). Clicking on an icon opens a Figure Window with the corresponding figure
displayed.  In  addition,  the  MATLAB  command  that  created  the  plot  is  dis-
played  in  the  Command  Window.  The  user  can  then  copy  the  command  and
paste it into a script file such that in the future the same figure will be created
when the script file is executed. On the right side of the Toolstrip the user can
choose to view different plot types in the same Figure Window (Reuse Figure),
or to view a new figure type in a new Figure Window (New Figure), such that
figure types can be compared side by side.

Using the Plots Toolstrip is useful when the user wants to examine different
plot options for given data. For example, Figure 5-13 shows the default layout
of MATLAB with the PLOTS Toolstrip displayed. In the Command Window,
the sales data from Section 5.1.1 are assigned to two vectors yr and sle. The
vectors are also displayed (and selected) in the Workspace Window. Icons with
images of various type of plots that can be created are displayed in the PLOTS
Toolstrip at the top. Additional types of plots can be displayed by clicking on
the down-arrow on the right.

Figure 5-13:  Using the PLOTS Toolstrip.

