5.14 Problems

165

x 105

3

ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO AN ELECTRIC DIPOLE

2.5

2

1.5

1

)

/

C
N

(

l

d
e
i
f

c
i
r
t
c
e
e

l

e
h
t

f
o

e
d
u
t
i
n
g
a
M

0.5
−0.05 −0.04 −0.03 −0.02 −0.01

0.01
0.02
 − axis (m)
Position along the  x

0

0.03

0.04

0.05

5.14 PROBLEMS

1. Use  the  plot  command  to  plot  the  function

  for

.

2. Use the plot command to plot the function

for

.

3. Use

the

plot

command

to

plot

the

function

 for

.

4. Plot the function

 in one figure.
Plot the function with a solid line, and the derivative with a dashed line. Add
a legend and label the axes.

 and its derivative for

5. Make two separate plots of the function

one plot for

 and one for

.

6. Use  the  fplot  command  to  plot  the  function

.

,

  for

7. Plot  the  function
same plot, for
ative with a dashed line. Add a legend and label the axes.

  and  its  derivative,  both  on  the
. Plot the function with a solid line and the deriv-

8. The orbit of the planet Mercury around the sun can be approximated by the

equation

 miles. Make a plot of the orbit.

166

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

9. A parametric equation is given by

x
Plot  the  function  for
range from –1.5 to 1.5.

=

0.7

sin

10t

,

y

=

1.2

sin

8t

.  Format  the  plot  such  that  both  axes  will

10. The  butterfly  curve  (Fay,  T.  H.  "The  Butterfly
Curve."  Amer.  Math.  Monthly  96,  pp.  442-443,
1989) is given by the following parametric equa-
tions:

3

2

1

0

-1

y

On one page make two plots of butterfly curves.
.
One for

 and the other for

11. A plot of an astroid is shown in the figure on the
right. Make the plot using the Cartesian equation:

12.  Make  the  plot  of  the  astroid  that  is  shown  in  the
previous  problem  by  using  the  parametric  equa-
tion:
x
=

 and

 for

cos3

sin3

=

y

t

t

.

-3

-2

-1

0
x

1

2

3

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

13. Plot the  function

  in  the  domain

.  Notice  that  the

x

2=

function  has  a  vertical  asymptote  at
.  Plot  the  function  by  creating
two vectors for the domain of x. The first vector (name it x1) includes ele-
ments from 0 to 1.9, and the second vector (name it  x2) includes elements
from 2.1 to 4. For each x vector create a y vector (name them y1 and y2) with
the corresponding values of y according to the function. To plot the func-
tion make two curves in the same plot (y1 vs. x1, and y2 vs. x2).

14. Plot  the  function

  for

.  Notice  that  the  function

has two vertical asymptotes. Plot the function by dividing the domain of x
into  three  parts:  one  from  –4  to  near  the  left  asymptote,  one  between  the
two asymptotes, and one from near the right asymptote to 4. Set the range
of the y axis from –15 to 15.

5.14 Problems

167

15. The  shape  of  the  heart  shown  in  the  figure  is

given by the equation:

Make a plot of the heart.

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

y

16. The shape of the pretzel shown is given by the

following parametric equations:

where

. Make a plot of the pretzel.

-1.5

-1

-0.5

0
x

0.5

1

1.5

17. Make a polar plot of the function:

  for

The plot, shown in the figure, is Fermat’s spiral.

18. Make a polar plot of the function:

The plot is shown on the right.

  for

19. Make a plot (shown) of the function:

(Hint: Rewrite the function in a polar form.)

20. Plot  two  ellipses  is  one  figure  (shown).  The
ellipse  with  the  solid  line  has  major  axes  of
. The ellipse with the dashed
a
line is the solid-line ellipse rotated by 30º.

 and

10=

4=

b

150

180

210

120

240

120

150

180

210

2

1

y

0

-1

-2

-2

10

5

0

-5

y

60

90

  4

  3

  2

  1

300

60

270

90

  10

  8

  6

  4

  2

30

0

330

30

0

330

240

300

270

-1

0
x

1

2

-10

-15

-10

-5

5

10

15

0
x

168

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

21. The  following  data  gives  the  height  (in  inches)  of  a  sunflower  plant  as  a

function of time (days after it was planted).

Time (days)
Height (in.)

10
9

20
22

30
44

40
63

50
80

60
94

70
97

The height can be modeled by the logistic function:

where H is the height (in.) and t is the time (days). Make a plot of the height
versus time. The figure should show the data from the table above as points
and the height modeled by the equation as a solid line. Add a legend, and
label the axes.

22. The  voltage

VC

  t seconds  after  closing  the  switch

in the circuit shown is given by:

Plot
axes.

VC
V0

 as a function of t for
36=

2 500

,=

V,

R

s. Label the
F.
,=
1 200

, and

C

23. The force F (in N) acting between a particle with a
charge  q  and  a  round  disk  with  a  radius  R  and  a
charge Q is given by the equation:

z

R

  C2/(N-m2)  is  the  permittiv-
where
ity  constant  and  z  is  the  distance  to  the  particle.
C,
case  where
Consider

the
C,  and

m.  Make  a  plot  of  F  as  a  function  of  z  for
m.  Use  MATLAB’s  built-in  function  max  to  find  the  maximum

0.1=

R

value of F and the corresponding distance z.

24. The  curvilinear  motion  of  a  particle  is
defined by the following parametric equa-
tions:

m

m

The velocity of the particle is given by

,  where

  and

.

120

100

80

60

40

20

)

m

(

y

For
s  make  one  plot  that  shows
the  position  of  the  particle  (y  versus  x)
and  a  second  plot  (on  the  same  page)  of
the velocity of the particle as a function of time. In addition, by using MAT-

x (m)

100

50

0

0

5.14 Problems

169

LAB’s min function, determine the time at which the velocity is the lowest,
and  the  corresponding  position  of  the  particle.  Using  an  asterisk  marker,
show the position of the particle in the first plot. For time use a vector with
spacing of 0.1 s.

25. The height and speed of a projectile shoot at a
 as a function of time are

speed v0 at an angle
given by:

m/s2. Determine the time that

where
the projectile will hit the ground and plot the height and the speed as a func-
m/s  and
tion  of  time  (two  plots  on  one  page)  for  the  case  that

. Add titles and label the axes.

26. The position x as a function of time of a particle that moves along a straight

line is given by:

ft

The velocity v(t) of the particle is determined by the derivative of x(t) with
respect to t, and the acceleration a(t) is determined by the derivative of v(t)
with respect to t.

Derive the expressions for the velocity and acceleration of the particle,
and  make  plots  of  the  position,  velocity,  and  acceleration  as  functions  of
time for
s. Use the subplot command to make the three plots on
the same page with the plot of the position on the top, the velocity in the
middle,  and  the  acceleration  at  the  bottom.  Label  the  axes  appropriately
with the correct units.

27. According  to  Planck’s  law  of  black-
body  radiation,  the  spectral  energy
density R as a function of wavelength
(m) and temperature T (K) is given by:

where

light,

m/s  is  the  speed  of

J-s is the Planck

constant,  and
Boltzmann constant. Make the shown figure that contains plots of R as a
m for three temperatures T=3,000 K, T=4,000
function of
K, and T=5,000 K.

J/K  is

for

170

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

28. A high-pass filter passes signals with frequencies
that  are  higher  than  a  certain  cutoff  frequency.
In  this  filter  the  ratio  of  the  magnitudes  of  the
voltages is given by:

C

Vi

R

Vo

where

  is  the  frequency  of  the  input  signal.  Given

  and

F, plot

 as a function of f for

 Hz. Use logarith-

mic scale for the horizontal (f) axis and linear scale for the vertical axis.

29. A resistor, R = 4

, and an inductor, L = 1.3 H, are connected in a circuit to a
voltage  source  as  shown  in  Figure  (a)  (an  RL  circuit).  When  the  voltage

(a)

(b)

source  applies  a  rectangular  voltage  pulse  with  an  amplitude  of  V  =  12  V
and a duration of 0.5 s, as shown in Figure (b), the current i(t) in the circuit
as a function of time is given by:

  for

  for

 s

 s

Make a plot of the current as a function of time for

s.

is  pulled

30. In  a  typical  tension  test  a  dog-bone
shaped  specimen
in  a
machine.  During  the  test,  the  force  F
needed  to  pull  the  specimen  and  the
length L of a gauge section are measured. This data is used for plotting a
stress-strain diagram of the material. Two definitions, engineering and true,
  are
exist  for  stress  and  strain.  The  engineering  stress

  and  strain

L0

F

F

defined  by

,  where  L0  and  A0  are  the  initial  gauge
length and the initial cross-sectional area of the specimen, respectively. The

  and

true stress

 and strain

 are defined by

 and

.

The following are measurements of force and gauge length from a ten-

5.14 Problems

171

sion test with an aluminum specimen. The specimen has a round cross sec-
tion with a radius of 0.25 in. (before the test). The initial gauge length is 0.5
in. Use the data to calculate and generate the engineering and true stress-
strain  curves,  both  on  the  same  plot.  Label  the  axes  and  use  a  legend  to
identify the curves.
Units: When the force is measured in pounds (lb) and the area is calculated
in in.2, the unit of the stress is psi (pounds per square inch).

F (lb)

L (in.)

0

4,390

7,250

10,780 11,710 12,520 12,800 13,340

0.5

0.50146 0.50226 0.50344 0.50423 0.50577 0.50693 0.51138

F (lb)

13,740 13,820 13,850 13,910 13,990 14,020 14,130

L (in.)

0.52006 0.52169 0.52362 0.52614 0.53406 0.54018 0.56466

31. According  to  special relativity, a  rod  of  length  L moving at  velocity  v will

shorten by an amount

, given by:

where  c is the speed of light (about

 m/s). Consider a rod of 2 m

 m/s.
long, and make three plots of
In the first plot use linear scale for both axes. In the second plot use loga-
rithmic scale for v and linear scale for
, and in the third plot use logarith-
mic scale for both v and

. Which of the plots is the most informative?

 as a function of v for

32. A  railroad  bumper  is  designed  to  slow
down a rapidly moving railroad car. After
a 20,000-kg railroad car traveling at 20 m/s
engages the bumper, its displacement x (in
meters)  and  velocity  v  (in  m/s)  as  a  func-
tion of time t (in seconds) is given by:

  and

x

v

m

Plot the displacement and the velocity as a function of time for
Make two plots on one page.

s.

33. The ideal gas equation states that

,

where P is the pressure, V is the volume, T
is  the  temperature,
(L  atm)/
(mol  K)  is  the  gas  constant,  and  n  is  the
number  of  moles.  Real  gases,  especially  at
high  pressures,  deviate  from  this  behavior.
Their  response  can  be  modeled  with  the

172

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

van der Waals equation

, where a and b are material con-

  L2atm/mol2,  and

  L/mol.  Make  the
stants.  For  CO2
shown  figure  that  displays  two  plots  of  P  versus  V  for
L.  In
one plot the pressure is calculated by using the ideal gas equation and the
other by using the van der Waals equation. Label the axes and display a leg-
end.

34. Two  sound  waves  of  slightly
different frequencies f1 and f2:

produce sound that is alternat-
ing  loud  and  soft.  This  phe-
is  called
nomenon,  which
beating,  is  described  by  the
equation:

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

2

1

0

-1

-2

0

0.05

0.1

0.15
Time (s)

0.2

0.25

0.3

Make a plot of the beating sound (shown) for

s for the case that

Hz and

Hz.

35. Consider the diode circuit shown in the fig-
ure. The  current
  can
be determined from the solution of the fol-
lowing system of equations:

 and the voltage

vD

iD

,

vS

R

iD

vD

Diode

 as a function of
 from both equations. The solution is the intersection of the two curves.

The  system  can  be  solved  numerically  or
graphically. The graphical solution is found by plotting
vD
Make  the  plots  and  estimate  the  solution  for  the  case  where

A,

iD

vS

1.5=

V,

R

=

1200

, and

mV.

5.14 Problems

173

36. A  monochromatic  light  that  passes
through  a  double  slit  produces  on  a
screen a diffraction pattern consisting
of bright and dark fringes. The inten-
sity of the bright fringes, I, as a func-
tion of
 can be calculated by:

where

 and

,

is  the  light  wave  length,  a  is  the  width  of  the
slits,  and  d  is  the  distance  between  the  slits.
Plot (as shown) the relative intensity
as  a  function  of  y  (distance  to  fringes  on  the
nm,
screen)  for

mm, and

  cm  given
mm.

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

0
-4

-3

-2

-1

0
Distance (cm)

1

2

3

4

37. A  simply  supported  beam

is
loaded as shown. The shear force
V  and  bending  moment  M  as  a
function of x are given by the fol-
lowing equations:

y

200 lb/ft

250 lb/ft

x

lb

 lb-ft

 ft.

lb,

ft.

lb,

for

for

8 ft

12 ft

20 ft

lb-ft   for

ft

lb-ft

Plot the shear force and the bending moment as a function of x (two figures
on one page such that the shear force diagram is displayed above the bend-
ing moment diagram).

38. Biological oxygen demand (BOD) is a measure of the relative oxygen deple-
tion effect of a waste contaminant and is widely used to assess the amount
 in mg/L) of a
of pollution in a water source. The BOD in the effluent (
rock filter without recirculation is given by:

Lc

L0

where
is the hydraulic flow rate [L/(m2-day)]. Assuming
300
the effluent BOD as a function of the depth of the filter (

 is the influent BOD (mg/L), D is the depth of the filter (m), and Q
L/(m2-day) plot
m)

Q

=

174

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

,

,

=

L0

5 10 and 20

mg/L.  Make  the  three  plots  in  one  figure  and  esti-
for
mate the depth of filter required for each of these cases to obtain drinkable
water. Label the axes and display a legend.

39. The  shape  of  a  asymmetric  four-digit
series  NACA  airfoil  is  described  by  the
equations:

0.2

0

)

m

(

y

-0.2

0

0.5

1

1.5

x (m)

where  the  subscripts  U  and  L  corresponds  to  the  upper  and  lower  airfoil
surface, respectively. yt is half the thickness of the foil given by:

where c is the cord length, t is the maximum thickness (as a fraction of the
cord length), and x is the position along the cord. yc is the coordinate of the
camber line given by:

 for

, and

 for

where m and p are constants. The angle

 is given by:

  for

,  and

  for

.  Plot  the  airfoil  shown  in  the  figure  (NACA  4412)  for  which

,

,

, and

m.

40. The  Taylor  series  expansion  for

1.5

 is:

sin(x)
Two terms
Three term s
Five terms

1

)
x
(

2

n
s

i

0.5

0

Plot  the  figure  on  the  right,  which
,  the  plot  of
shows,  for

the function

 and plots of the

Taylor  series  expansion  of
with  two,  three,  and  five  terms.
Label the axes and display a legend.

-1

0

1

3

4

5

2
x

