5.3 Plotting Multiple Graphs in the Same Plot

143

properties and formatting (see Section 5.4) if any was done. Additional graphs
can be added with plot commands that are typed next. Each plot command
creates a graph that is added to that figure. The hold off command stops this
process. It returns MATLAB to the default mode, in which the plot command
erases the previous plot and resets the axis properties.

As an example, a solution of Sample Problem 5-1 using the hold  on and

hold off commands is shown in the following script file:

x=[-2:0.01:4];

y=3*x.^3-26*x+6;

yd=9*x.^2-26;

ydd=18*x;

plot(x,y,'-b')

hold on

plot(x,yd,'--r')

plot(x,ydd,':k')

hold off

The first graph is created.

Two more graphs are added to the figure.

5.3.3 Using the line Command

With the line command additional graphs (lines) can be added to a plot that
already exists. The form of the line command is:

line(x,y,‘PropertyName’,PropertyValue)

(Optional) Properties with values that can be
used to specify the line style, color, and width,
marker type, size, and edge and fill colors.

The format of the line command is almost the same as the plot command
(see Section 5.1). The line command does not have the line specifiers, but the
line style, color, and marker can be specified with the Property Name and prop-
erty value features. The properties are optional, and if none are entered MAT-
LAB uses default properties and values. For example, the command:

line(x,y,‘linestyle’,‘--’,‘color’,‘r’,‘marker’,‘o’)

will add a dashed red line with circular markers to a plot that already exists.

The  major  difference  between  the  plot  and  line  commands  is  that  the
plot command starts a new plot every time it is executed, while the line com-
mand  adds  lines  to  a  plot  that  already  exists.  To  make  a  plot  that  has  several
graphs,  a  plot  command  is  typed  first  and  then  line  commands  are  typed  for
additional  graphs.  (If  a  line  command  is  entered  before  a  plot  command,  an
error message is displayed.)

