5.3 Plotting Multiple Graphs in the Same Plot

141

sible  to  assign  8  to  a  variable,  and  then  use  the  variable  when  the  function  is
typed in the fplot command.

• The function to be plotted can be typed as a function of any letter. For example,
typed  as  @  (t)
the
the  previous  paragraph  can  be
8*t.^2+5*cos(t) or @ (z) 8*z.^2+5*cos(z)’.

function

in

limits:   The limits argument is  a vector  with two elements that specify the
domain  of  x  [xmin,xmax],  or  a  vector  with  four  elements  that  specifies  the
domain of x and the limits of the y-axis [xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax].

line specifiers:   The  line  specifiers  are  the  same  as  in  the  plot  com-
mand. For example, a plot of the function
 can
be created with the fplot command by typing:

 for

>> fplot(@ (x) x.^2+4*sin(2*x)-1,[-3 3])

in the Command Window. The figure that is obtained in the Figure Window is
shown in Figure 5-6.

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Figure 5-6: A plot of the function

.

5.3 PLOTTING MULTIPLE GRAPHS IN THE SAME PLOT

In many situations, there is a need to make several graphs in the same plot. This
is shown, for example, in Figure 5-1 where two graphs are plotted in the same
figure. There are three methods to plot multiple graphs in one figure. One is by
using the plot command, the second is by using the hold on and hold off
commands, and the third is by using the line command.

5.3.1 Using the plot Command

Two or more graphs can be created in the same plot by typing pairs of vectors
inside the plot command. The command

plot(x,y,u,v,t,h)

creates three graphs—y vs. x, v vs. u, and h vs. t—all in the same plot. The vec-
tors of each pair must be of the same length. MATLAB automatically plots the
graphs in different colors so that they can be identified. It is also possible to add

