5.3 Plotting Multiple Graphs in the Same Plot

141

sible  to  assign  8  to  a  variable,  and  then  use  the  variable  when  the  function  is
typed in the fplot command.

• The function to be plotted can be typed as a function of any letter. For example,
typed  as  @  (t)
the
the  previous  paragraph  can  be
8*t.^2+5*cos(t) or @ (z) 8*z.^2+5*cos(z)’.

function

in

limits:   The limits argument is  a vector  with two elements that specify the
domain  of  x  [xmin,xmax],  or  a  vector  with  four  elements  that  specifies  the
domain of x and the limits of the y-axis [xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax].

line specifiers:   The  line  specifiers  are  the  same  as  in  the  plot  com-
mand. For example, a plot of the function
 can
be created with the fplot command by typing:

 for

>> fplot(@ (x) x.^2+4*sin(2*x)-1,[-3 3])

in the Command Window. The figure that is obtained in the Figure Window is
shown in Figure 5-6.

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Figure 5-6: A plot of the function

.

5.3 PLOTTING MULTIPLE GRAPHS IN THE SAME PLOT

In many situations, there is a need to make several graphs in the same plot. This
is shown, for example, in Figure 5-1 where two graphs are plotted in the same
figure. There are three methods to plot multiple graphs in one figure. One is by
using the plot command, the second is by using the hold on and hold off
commands, and the third is by using the line command.

5.3.1 Using the plot Command

Two or more graphs can be created in the same plot by typing pairs of vectors
inside the plot command. The command

plot(x,y,u,v,t,h)

creates three graphs—y vs. x, v vs. u, and h vs. t—all in the same plot. The vec-
tors of each pair must be of the same length. MATLAB automatically plots the
graphs in different colors so that they can be identified. It is also possible to add

142

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

line specifiers following each pair. For example the command

plot(x,y,‘-b’,u,v,‘--r’,t,h,‘g:’)
plots y vs. x with a solid blue line, v vs.u with a dashed red line, and h vs. t with
a dotted green line.

Sample Problem 5-1: Plotting a function and its derivatives

Plot  the  function

,  and  its  first  and  second  derivatives,  for

, all in the same plot.

Solution

The first derivative of the function is:
The second derivative of the function is:
A script file that creates a vector x and calculates the values of y,

.
.

, and

 is:

x=[-2:0.01:4];

y=3*x.^3-26*x+6;

Create vector x with the domain of the function.
Create vector y with the function value at each x.

yd=9*x.^2-26;

ydd=18*x;

Create vector yd with values of the first derivative.
Create vector ydd with values of the second derivative.

plot(x,y,'-b',x,yd,'--r',x,ydd,':k')

Create three graphs, y vs. x, yd vs. x, and ydd vs. x, in the same figure.

The plot that is created is shown in Figure 5-7.

150

100

50

0

−50
−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 5-7: A plot of the function
 derivatives.

 and its first and second

5.3.2 Using the hold on and hold off Commands

To  plot  several  graphs  using  the  hold  on  and  hold  off  commands,  one
graph is plotted first with the plot command. Then the hold on command is
typed. This keeps the Figure Window with the first plot open, including the axis

5.3 Plotting Multiple Graphs in the Same Plot

143

properties and formatting (see Section 5.4) if any was done. Additional graphs
can be added with plot commands that are typed next. Each plot command
creates a graph that is added to that figure. The hold off command stops this
process. It returns MATLAB to the default mode, in which the plot command
erases the previous plot and resets the axis properties.

As an example, a solution of Sample Problem 5-1 using the hold  on and

hold off commands is shown in the following script file:

x=[-2:0.01:4];

y=3*x.^3-26*x+6;

yd=9*x.^2-26;

ydd=18*x;

plot(x,y,'-b')

hold on

plot(x,yd,'--r')

plot(x,ydd,':k')

hold off

The first graph is created.

Two more graphs are added to the figure.

5.3.3 Using the line Command

With the line command additional graphs (lines) can be added to a plot that
already exists. The form of the line command is:

line(x,y,‘PropertyName’,PropertyValue)

(Optional) Properties with values that can be
used to specify the line style, color, and width,
marker type, size, and edge and fill colors.

The format of the line command is almost the same as the plot command
(see Section 5.1). The line command does not have the line specifiers, but the
line style, color, and marker can be specified with the Property Name and prop-
erty value features. The properties are optional, and if none are entered MAT-
LAB uses default properties and values. For example, the command:

line(x,y,‘linestyle’,‘--’,‘color’,‘r’,‘marker’,‘o’)

will add a dashed red line with circular markers to a plot that already exists.

The  major  difference  between  the  plot  and  line  commands  is  that  the
plot command starts a new plot every time it is executed, while the line com-
mand  adds  lines  to  a  plot  that  already  exists.  To  make  a  plot  that  has  several
graphs,  a  plot  command  is  typed  first  and  then  line  commands  are  typed  for
additional  graphs.  (If  a  line  command  is  entered  before  a  plot  command,  an
error message is displayed.)

