148

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

axis([xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax])

Sets  the  limits  of  both  the  x  and  y
axes  (xmin,  xmax,  ymin,  and
ymax are numbers).

axis equal     Sets the same scale for both axes.

axis square

 Sets the axes region to be square.

axis tight

 Sets the axis limits to the range of the data.

The grid command:

grid on    Adds grid lines to the plot.

grid off   Removes grid lines from the plot.

An example of formatting a plot by using commands is given in the following
script file that was used to generate the formatted plot in Figure 5-1.

x=[10:0.1:22];

y=95000./x.^2;

xd=[10:2:22];

yd=[950  640  460  340  250  180  140];

plot(x,y,'-','LineWidth',1.0)

xlabel('DISTANCE (cm)')

ylabel('INTENSITY (lux)')

Formatting text inside
the title command.

title('\fontname{Arial}Light Intensity as a Function of Distance','FontSize',14)

axis([8 24 0 1200])

text(14,700,'Comparison
Color','r','LineWidth',2)

hold on

between

theory

and

experiment.','Edge-

plot(xd,yd,'ro--','linewidth',1.0,'markersize',10)

legend('Theory','Experiment',0)

hold off

Formatting text
inside the text
command.

5.4.2 Formatting a Plot Using the Plot Editor

A plot can be formatted interactively in the Figure Window by clicking on the
plot and/or using the menus. Figure 5-8 shows the Figure Window with the plot
of Figure 5-1. The Plot Editor can be used to introduce new formatting items or
to  modify  formatting  that  was  initially  introduced  with  the  formatting  com-
mands.

