144

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

The solution to Sample Problem 5-1, which is the plot in Figure 5-7, can be
obtained  by  using  the  plot  and  line  commands  as  shown  in  the  following
script file:

x=[-2:0.01:4];

y=3*x.^3-26*x+6;

yd=9*x.^2-26;

ydd=18*x;

plot(x,y,'LineStyle','-','color','b')

line(x,yd,'LineStyle','--','color','r')

line(x,ydd,'linestyle',':','color','k')

5.4 FORMATTING A PLOT

The plot and fplot commands create bare plots. Usually, however, a figure
that contains a plot needs to be formatted to have a specific look and to display
information  in  addition  to  the  graph  itself.  This  can  include  specifying  axis
labels, plot title, legend, grid, range of custom axis, and text labels.

Plots can be formatted by using MATLAB commands that follow the plot
or fplot command, or interactively by using the plot editor in the Figure Win-
dow. The first method is useful when a plot command is a part of a computer
program (script file). When the formatting commands are included in the pro-
gram,  a  formatted  plot  is  created  every  time  the  program  is  executed.  On  the
other hand, formatting that is done in the Figure Window with the plot editor
after a plot has been created holds only for that specific plot, and will have to be
repeated the next time the plot is created.

5.4.1 Formatting a Plot Using Commands

The formatting commands are entered after the plot or the fplot command.
The various formatting commands are:

The xlabel and ylabel commands:

Labels can be placed next to the axes with the xlabel and ylabel command
which have the form:

xlabel(‘text as string’)
ylabel(‘text as string’)

The title command:

A title can be added to the plot with the command:

title(‘text as string’)

The text is placed at the top of the figure as a title.

5.4 Formatting a Plot

The text command:

145

A text label can be placed in the plot with the text or gtext commands:

text(x,y,‘text as string’)
gtext(‘text as string’)

The text command places the text in the figure such that the first character is
positioned at the point with the coordinates x, y (according to the axes of the
figure). The gtext command places the text at a position specified by the user.
When the command is executed, the Figure Window opens and the user speci-
fies the position with the mouse.

The legend command:

The legend command places a legend on the plot. The legend shows a sample
of the line type of each graph that is plotted, and places a label, specified by the
user, beside the line sample. The form of the command is:

legend(‘string1’,‘string2’, ..... ,‘Location’,‘pos’)

The strings are the labels that are placed next to the line sample. Their order cor-
responds  to  the  order  in  which  the  graphs  were  created.  The  ‘Loca-
tion’,‘pos’ are optional strings that specifies where in the figure the legend
is to be placed. Several options are:

NE  Places the legend at the upper-right corner of the plot (default).
NW
SE
SW
B

Places the legend at the upper-left corner of the plot.
Places the legend at the lower-right corner of the plot.
Places the legend at the lower-left corner of the plot.
Places the legend inside the plot in a location that interferes the least with
the graphs.
Places the legend in a least unused space outside the plot.

BO
To read about other options for the position of the legend type help legend
in the Command Window.

Formatting the text within the xlabel, ylabel, title, text

and legend commands:

The text in the string that is included in the command and is displayed when the
command is executed can be formatted. The formatting can be used to define
the font, size, position (superscript, subscript), style (italic, bold, etc.), and color
of  the  characters,  the  color  of  the  background,  and  many  other  details  of  the
display. Some of the more common formatting possibilities are described below.
A complete explanation of all the formatting features can be found in the Help
Window under Text and Text Properties. The formatting can be done either by
adding  modifiers  inside  the  string,  or  by  adding  to  the  command  optional
PropertyName and PropertyValue arguments following the string.

146

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

The modifiers are characters that are inserted within the string. Some of the

modifiers that can be added are:

Modifier

Effect

Modifier

\bf

bold font

\fontname{fontname}

\it

italic style

\fontsize{fontsize}

Effect

specified font
is used

specified font
size is used

\rm

normal font

These modifiers affect the text from the point at which they are inserted until the
end of the string. It is also possible to have the modifiers applied to only a sec-
tion of the string by typing the modifier and the text to be affected inside braces
{ }.

Subscript and superscript:

A single character can be displayed as a subscript or a superscript by typing _
(the  underscore  character)  or  ^  in  front  of  the  character,  respectively.  Several
consecutive characters can be displayed as a subscript or a superscript by typing
the characters inside braces { } following the _ or the ^.

Greek characters:

Greek characters can be included in the text by typing \name of the letter
within  the  string.  To  display  a  lowercase  Greek  letter,  the  name  of  the  letter
should be typed in all lowercase English characters. To display a capital Greek
letter,  the name  of the  letter  should start  with  a capital  letter.  Some  examples
are:

Characters
in the string

Greek
letter

Characters
in the string

Greek
letter

\alpha

\beta

\gamma

\theta

\pi

\sigma

\Phi

\Delta

\Gamma

\Lambda

\Omega

\Sigma

Formatting of the text that is displayed by the xlabel, ylabel, title,
and  text  commands  can  also  be  done  by  adding  optional  PropertyName
and  PropertyValue  arguments  following  the  string  inside  the  command.

5.4 Formatting a Plot

147

With this option, the text command, for example, has the form:

text(x,y,‘text as string’,PropertyName,PropertyValue)

In the other three commands the PropertyName and PropertyValue argu-
ments are added in the same way. The PropertyName is typed as a string, and
the  PropertyValue  is  typed  as  a  number  if  the  property  value  is  a  number
and as a string if the property value is a word or a letter character. Some of the
Property Names and corresponding possible Property Values are:

Property name

Description

Rotation

FontAngle

FontName

FontSize

FontWeight

Color

Background-
Color

EdgeColor

LineWidth

Specifies  the  orientation
of the text.
Specifies  italic  or  nor-
mal style characters.
Specifies  the font for the
text.

Specifies  the  size  of  the
font.
Specifies  the  weight  of
the characters.

the

Specifies the color of the
text.
back-
Specifies
ground  color  (rectangu-
lar area).
Specifies the color of the
edge of a rectangular box
around the text.
Specifies the width of the
edge of a rectangular box
around the text.

Possible property
values
Scalar (degrees)
Default: 0
normal, italic
Default: normal
Font name that is
available in the sys-
tem.
Scalar (points)
Default: 10
light, normal,
bold
Default: normal
Color specifiers (see
Section 5.1).
Color specifiers (see
Section 5.1).

Color specifiers (see
Section 5.1).
Default: none.
Scalar (points)
Default: 0.5

The axis command:

When the plot(x,y) command is executed, MATLAB creates axes with lim-
its that are based on the minimum and maximum values of  the elements of x
and y. The axis command can be used to change the range and the appearance
of  the  axes.  In  many  situations,  a  graph  looks  better  if  the  range  of  the  axes
extend  beyond  the  range  of  the  data.  The  following  are  some  of  the  possible
forms of the axis command:

148

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

axis([xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax])

Sets  the  limits  of  both  the  x  and  y
axes  (xmin,  xmax,  ymin,  and
ymax are numbers).

axis equal     Sets the same scale for both axes.

axis square

 Sets the axes region to be square.

axis tight

 Sets the axis limits to the range of the data.

The grid command:

grid on    Adds grid lines to the plot.

grid off   Removes grid lines from the plot.

An example of formatting a plot by using commands is given in the following
script file that was used to generate the formatted plot in Figure 5-1.

x=[10:0.1:22];

y=95000./x.^2;

xd=[10:2:22];

yd=[950  640  460  340  250  180  140];

plot(x,y,'-','LineWidth',1.0)

xlabel('DISTANCE (cm)')

ylabel('INTENSITY (lux)')

Formatting text inside
the title command.

title('\fontname{Arial}Light Intensity as a Function of Distance','FontSize',14)

axis([8 24 0 1200])

text(14,700,'Comparison
Color','r','LineWidth',2)

hold on

between

theory

and

experiment.','Edge-

plot(xd,yd,'ro--','linewidth',1.0,'markersize',10)

legend('Theory','Experiment',0)

hold off

Formatting text
inside the text
command.

5.4.2 Formatting a Plot Using the Plot Editor

A plot can be formatted interactively in the Figure Window by clicking on the
plot and/or using the menus. Figure 5-8 shows the Figure Window with the plot
of Figure 5-1. The Plot Editor can be used to introduce new formatting items or
to  modify  formatting  that  was  initially  introduced  with  the  formatting  com-
mands.

