5.5 Plots with Logarithmic Axes

149

Click the arrow button to start the plot edit mode. Then click
on an item. A window with formatting tool for the item opens.

Use the Edit
and Insert
menus to add
formatting
objects, or to
edit existing
objects.

Change posi-
tion of a label,
legend, or
other object
by clicking on
the object and
dragging.

Figure 5-8: Formatting a plot using the Plot Editor.

5.5 PLOTS WITH LOGARITHMIC AXES

Many science and engineering applications require plots in which one or both
axes have a logarithmic (log) scale. Log scales provide means for presenting data
over a wide range of values. It also provides a tool for identifying characteristics
of data and possible forms of mathematical relationships that can be appropri-
ate for modeling the data (see Section 8.2.2).

MATLAB commands for making plots with log axes are:

semilogy(x,y)   Plots y versus x with a log (base 10) scale for the y

semilogx(x,y)

loglog(x,y)

axis and linear scale for the x axis.
Plots y versus x with a log (base 10) scale for the x
axis and linear scale for the y axis.
Plots y versus x with a log (base 10) scale for both axes.

Line specifiers and Property Name and Property Value arguments can be added
to the commands (optional) just as in the plot command. As an example, Fig-

ure  5-9  shows  a  plot  of  the  function
.  The  figure
shows four plots of the same function: one with linear axes, one with a log scale
for the y axis, one with a log scale for the x axis, and one with a log scale on both
axes.

  for

