5.8 Histograms

153

Stem Plot

Function
Format

stem(x,y)

30

25

20

15

10

5

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

(

l

s
e
a
S

yr=[1988:1994];
sle=[8 12 20 22 18 24 27];
stem(yr,sle)
xlabel('Year')
ylabel('Sales (Mil-
lions)')

0
1988

1989

1990

1991
Year

1992

1993

1994

Pie charts are useful for visualizing the relative sizes of different but related
quantities. For example, the table below shows the grades that were assigned to
a class. The data is used to create the pie chart that follows.

Grade

Number of students

A

11

B

18

C

26

D

9

E

5

Pie Plot

Function
format:

pie(x)

grd=[11 18 26 9 5];
pie(grd)
title('Class Grades')

MATLAB draws the
sections in different
colors. The letters
(grades) were added
using the Plot Editor.

5.8 HISTOGRAMS

Histograms are plots that show the distribution of data. The overall range of a
given  set  of  data  points  is  divided  into  subranges  (bins),  and  the  histogram
shows how many data points are in each bin. The histogram is a vertical bar plot
in which the width of each bar is equal to the range of the corresponding bin
and the height of the bar corresponds to the number of data points in the bin.
Histograms  are  created  in  MATLAB  with  the  hist  command.  The  simplest
form of the command is:

hist(y)

y is  a  vector  with  the  data  points.  MATLAB  divides  the  range  of  the  data
points  into  10  equally  spaced  subranges  (bins)  and  then  plots  the
number of data points in each bin.

For example, the following data points are the daily maximum temperature
(in °F) in Washington, DC, during the month of April 2002: 58 73 73 53 50 48

154

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

56 73 73 66 69 63 74 82 84 91 93 89 91 80 59 69 56 64 63 66 64 74 63 69 (data
from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). A histogram
of this data is obtained with the commands:

>> y=[58 73 73 53 50 48 56 73 73 66 69 63 74 82 84 91 93 89
91 80 59 69 56 64 63 66 64 74 63 69];

>> hist(y)

The  plot  that  is  generated  is  shown  in  Figure  5-11  (the  axis  titles  were  added
using the Plot Editor). The smallest value in the data set is 48 and the largest is
93, which means that the range is 45 and the width of each bin is 4.5. The range
of the first bin is from 48 to 52.5 and contains two points. The range of the sec-
ond bin is from 52.5 to 57 and contains three points, and so on. Two of the bins
(75 to 79.5 and 84 to 88.5) do not contain any points.

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

s
y
a
d

f

o
r
e
b
m
u
N

0
40

50

60

70
Temperature (F)

80

90

100

Figure 5-11: Histogram of temperature data.

Since the division of the data range into 10 equally spaced bins might not be
the division that is preferred by the user, the number of bins can be defined to be
different than 10. This can be done either by specifying the number of bins, or
by specifying the center point of each bin as shown in the following two forms of
the hist command:

hist(y,nbins)

or

hist(y,x)

nbins

is a scalar that defines the number of bins. MATLAB divides the range
in equally spaced subranges.

x

is a vector that specifies the location of the center of each bin (the dis-
tance between the centers does not have to be the same for all the bins).
The edges of the bins are at the middle point between the centers.

5.8 Histograms

155

In  the  example  above  the  user
might prefer to divide the temperature
range into three bins. This can be done
with the command:

>> hist(y,3)

As shown in the  top graph, the histo-
gram  that
is  generated  has  three
equally spaced bins.

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

s
y
a
d

f

o
r
e
b
m
u
N

0
40

50

60

70
Temperature (F)

80

90

100

8

10

The number and width of the bins
can  also  be  specified  by  a  vector  x
whose  elements  define  the  centers  of
the  bins.  For  example,  shown  in  the
lower  graph  is  a  histogram  that  dis-
plays the temperature data from above
in  six  bins  with  an  equal  width  of  10
degrees.  The  elements  of  the  vector  x
for this plot are 45, 55, 65, 75, 85, and
95. The plot was obtained with the following commands:

s
y
a
d
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

55

45

2

0

6

4

65

75

Temperature (F)

85

95

>> x=[45:10:95]

x =
   45   55   65   75   85   95

>> hist(y,x)

The hist command can be used with options that provide numerical out-
put in addition to plotting a histogram. An output of the number of data points
in each bin can be obtained with one of the following commands:

n=hist(y)

n=hist(y,nbins)

n=hist(y,x)

The output n is a vector. The number of elements in n is equal to the number of
bins, and the value of each element of n is the number of data points (frequency
count) in the corresponding bin. For example, the histogram in Figure 5-11 can
also be created with the following command:

>> n = hist(y)

n =
   2  3  2  7  3  6  0  3  0  4

The vector n shows how many
elements are in each bin.

The  vector  n  shows  that  the  first  bin  has  two  data  points,  the  second  bin  has
three data points, and so on.

