156

Chapter 5: Two-Dimensional Plots

An  additional,  optional  numerical  output  is  the  location  of  the  bins.  This

output can be obtained with one of the following commands:

[n xout]=hist(y)

[n xout]=hist(y,nbins)

xout is a vector in which the value of each element is the location of the center
of the corresponding bin. For example, for the histogram in Figure 5-11:

>> [n xout]=hist(y)

n =
   2   3   2   7   3   6   0   3   0   4

xout =
      50.2500    54.7500    59.2500    63.7500    68.2500    72.7500
77.2500  81.7500  86.2500  90.7500

The vector xout shows that the center of the first bin is at 50.25, the center of
the second bin is at 54.75, and so on.

5.9 POLAR PLOTS

Polar  coordinates,  in  which  the  position  of  a  point  in  a
plane is defined by the angle
 and the radius (distance)
to the point, are frequently used in the solution of science
and engineering problems. The polar command is used
to plot functions in polar coordinates. The command has
the form:

polar(theta,radius,‘line specifiers’)

Vector

Vector

(Optional) Specifiers that
define the type and color
of the line and markers.

where theta and radius are vectors whose elements define the coordinates of
the points to be plotted. The polar command plots the points and draws the
polar grid. The line specifiers are the same as in the plot command. To plot a
function
 in a certain domain, a vector for values of
 is created first,
and then a vector r with the corresponding values of
 is created using ele-
ment-by-element calculations. The two vectors are then used in the polar com-
mand.

f=

r

f

