176

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

The user-defined function carries out the calculations and transfers the results
back to the main program, which then continues to the next command.

6.1 RELATIONAL AND LOGICAL OPERATORS

A relational operator compares two numbers by determining whether a compar-
ison statement (e.g., 5 < 8) is true or false. If the statement is true, it is assigned a
value of 1. If the statement is false, it is assigned a value of 0. A logical operator
examines true/false statements and produces a result that is true (1) or false (0)
according to the specific operator. For example, the logical AND operator gives
1 only if both statements are true. Relational and logical operators can be used
in mathematical expressions and, as will be shown in this chapter, are frequently
used in combination with other commands to make decisions that control the
flow of a computer program.

Relational operators:

Relational operators in MATLAB are:

Relational operator

Description

<

>

<=

>=

= =

~=

Less than

Greater than

Less than or equal to

Greater than or equal to

Equal to

Not Equal to

Note  that  the  “equal  to”  relational  operator  consists  of  two  =  signs  (with  no
space between them), since one = sign is the assignment operator. In other rela-
tional operators that consist of two characters, there also is no space between
the characters (<=, >=, ~=).

• Relational  operators  are  used  as  arithmetic  operators  within  a  mathematical
expression. The result can be used in other mathematical operations, in address-
ing arrays, and together with other MATLAB commands (e.g., if) to control
the flow of a program.

• When two numbers are compared, the result is 1 (logical true) if the comparison,
according to the relational operator, is true, and 0 (logical false) if the compari-
son is false.

•

•

If two scalars are compared, the result is a scalar 1 or 0. If two arrays are com-
pared (only arrays of the same size can be compared), the comparison is done
element-by-element, and the result is a logical array of the same size with 1s and
0s according to the outcome of the comparison at each address.

If a scalar is compared with an array, the scalar is compared with every element

6.1 Relational and Logical Operators

177

of the array, and the result is a logical array with 1s and 0s according to the out-
come of the comparison of each element.

Some examples are:

>> 5>8

ans =
     0

Checks if 5 is larger than 8.
Since the comparison is false (5 is
not larger than 8) the answer is 0.

>> a=5<10

Checks if 5 is smaller than 10, and assigns the answer to a.

a =
     1

Since the comparison is true (5 is smaller
than 10) the number 1 is assigned to a.

>> y=(6<10)+(7>8)+(5*3= =60/4)

Using relational opera-
tors in math expression.

Equal to 1 since
6 is smaller than 10.

Equal to 0 since 7 is
not larger than 8.

Equal to 1 since 5*3
is equal to 60/4.

y =
     2

>> b=[15 6 9 4 11 7 14]; c=[8 20 9 2 19 7 10];

Define vec-
tors b and c.

>> d=c>=b

Checks which c elements are larger than or equal to b elements.

d =
     0     1     1     0     1     1     0

Assigns 1 where an element of c is larger than or equal to an element of b.

>> b == c

Checks which b elements are equal to c elements.

ans =
     0     0     1     0     0     1     0

>> b~=c

Checks which b elements are not equal to c elements.

ans =
     1     1     0     1     1     0     1

>> f=b-c>0

f =
     1     0     0     1     0     0     1

Subtracts c from b and then checks
which elements are larger than zero.

>> A=[2 9 4; -3 5 2; 6 7 -1]

Define a

 matrix A.

A =
     2     9     4
    -3     5     2
     6     7    -1

>> B=A<=2

Checks which elements in A are smaller than
or equal to 2. Assigns the results to matrix B.

178

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

B =
     1     0     0
     1     0     1
     0     0     1

• The results of a relational operation with vectors, which are vectors with 0s and
1s, are called logical vectors and can be used for addressing vectors. When a log-
ical vector is used for addressing another vector, it extracts from that vector the
elements in the positions where the logical vector has 1s. For example:

>> r = [8 12 9 4 23 19 10]

Define a vector r.

r =
     8    12     9     4    23    19    10

>> s=r<=10

Checks which r elements are smaller than or equal to 10.

s =
     1     0     1     1     0     0     1

A logical vector s with 1s at positions where
elements of r are smaller than or equal to 10.

>> t=r(s)

t =
     8     9     4    10

Use s for addresses in vector r to create vector t.
Vector t consists of elements of
r in positions where s has 1s.

>> w=r(r<=10)

The same procedure can be done in one step.

w =
     8     9     4    10

• Numerical vectors and arrays with the numbers 0s and 1s are not the same as
logical vectors and arrays with 0s and 1s. Numerical vectors and arrays can not
be used for addressing. Logical vectors and arrays, however, can be used in arith-
metic operations. The first time a logical vector or an array is used in arithmetic
operations it is changed to a numerical vector or array.

• Order of precedence: In a mathematical expression that includes relational and
arithmetic  operations,  the  arithmetic  operations  (+,  –,  *,  /,  \)  have  precedence
over relational operations. The relational operators themselves have equal prece-
dence and are evaluated from left to right. Parentheses can be used to alter the
order of precedence. Examples are:

>> 3+4<16/2

ans =
     1

+ and / are executed first.

The answer is 1 since 7 < 8 is true.

>> 3+(4<16)/2

4 < 16 is executed first, and is equal to 1, since it is true.

ans =
    3.5000

3.5 is obtained from 3 + 1/2.

6.1 Relational and Logical Operators

179

Logical operators:

Logical operators in MATLAB are:

Logical operator

Name

Description

&
Example: A&B

AND

|

OR

Example: A|B

~

NOT

Example: ~A

Operates  on  two  operands  (A  and  B).  If
both  are  true,  the  result  is  true  (1);  other-
wise the result is false (0).

Operates  on  two  operands  (A  and  B).  If
either  one,  or  both,  are  true,  the  result  is
true (1); otherwise (both are false) the result
is false (0).

Operates  on  one  operand  (A).  Gives  the
opposite of the operand; true (1) if the oper-
and  is  false,  and  false  (0)  if  the  operand  is
true.

• Logical operators have numbers as operands. A nonzero number is true, and a

zero number is false.

• Logical  operators  (like  relational  operators)  are  used  as  arithmetic  operators
within a mathematical expression. The result can be used in other mathematical
operations, in addressing arrays, and together with other MATLAB commands
(e.g., if) to control the flow of a program.

• Logical operators (like relational operators) can be used with scalars and arrays.

• The logical operations AND and OR can have both operands as scalars, both as
arrays, or one as an array and one as a scalar. If both are scalars, the result is a
scalar 0 or 1. If both are arrays, they must be of the same size and the logical
operation is done element-by-element. The result is an array of the same size with
1s  and  0s  according  to  the  outcome  of  the  operation  at  each  position.  If  one
operand  is  a  scalar  and  the  other  is  an  array,  the  logical  operation  is  done
between the scalar and each of the elements in the array and the outcome is an
array of the same size with 1s and 0s.

• The logical operation NOT has one operand. When it is used with a scalar, the
outcome is a scalar 0 or 1. When it is used with an array, the outcome is an array
of the same size with 0s in positions where the array has nonzero numbers and
1s in positions where the array has 0s.

Following are some examples:

>> 3&7

ans =
     1

3 AND 7.
3 and 7 are both true (nonzero), so the outcome is 1.

180

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

>> a=5|0

a =
     1

>> ~25

ans =
     0

5 OR 0 (assign to variable a).
1 is assigned to a since at least one number is true (nonzero).

NOT 25.
The outcome is 0 since 25 is true
(nonzero) and the opposite is false.

>> t=25*((12&0)+(~0)+(0|5))

Using logical operators in a math expression.

t =
    50

>> x=[9 3 0 11 0 15]; y=[2 0 13 -11 0 4];

Define two vec-
tors x and y.

>> x&y
ans =
     1     0     0     1     0     1

The outcome is a vector with 1 in every position where
both x and y are true (nonzero elements), and 0s otherwise.

>> z=x|y
z =
     1     1     1     1     0     1

The outcome is a vector with 1 in every position where either
or both x and y are true (nonzero elements), and 0s otherwise.

>> ~(x+y)
ans =
     0     0     0     1     1     0

The outcome is a vector with 0 in every position where
the vector x + y is true (nonzero elements), and 1 in
every position where x + y is false (zero elements).

Order of precedence:

Arithmetic, relational, and logical operators can be combined in mathematical
expressions. When an expression has such a combination, the result depends on
the  order  in  which  the  operations  are  carried  out.  The  following  is  the  order
used by MATLAB:

Precedence

Operation

1 (highest)

Parentheses (if nested parentheses exist, inner ones have
precedence)

2

3

4

5

6

7

Exponentiation

Logical NOT (~)

Multiplication, division

Addition, subtraction

Relational operators (>, <, >=, <=, = =, ~=)

Logical AND (&)

8 (lowest)

Logical OR ( | )

6.1 Relational and Logical Operators

181

If two or more operations have the same precedence, the expression is executed
in order from left to right.

It  should  be  pointed  out  here  that  the  order  shown  above  is  the  one  used
since MATLAB 6. Previous versions of MATLAB used a slightly different order
(& did not have precedence over |), so the user must be careful. Compatibility
problems  between  different  versions  of  MATLAB  can  be  avoided  by  using
parentheses even when they are not required.

The  following  are  examples  of  expressions  that  include  arithmetic,  rela-

tional, and logical operators:

>> x=-2; y=5;

>> -5<x<-1
ans =
     0

>> -5<x & x<-1
ans =
     1

>> ~(y<7)
ans =
     0

>> ~y<7
ans =
     1

>> ~((y>=8)|(x<-1))
ans =
     0

>> ~(y>=8)|(x<-1)
ans =
     1

Built-in logical functions:

Define variables x and y.
This inequality is correct mathematically. The answer,
however, is false since MATLAB executes from left to
right. –5 < x is true (=1) and then 1 < –1 is false (0).

The mathematically correct statement is obtained by
using the logical operator &. The inequalities are
executed first. Since both are true (1), the answer is 1.

y < 7 is executed first, it is true (1), and ~1 is 0.

~y is executed first, y is true (1) (since y
is nonzero), ~1 is 0, and 0 < 7 is true (1).

y >= 8 (false), and x < –1 (true) are exe-
cuted first. OR is executed next (true). ~
is executed last, and gives false (0).

y >= 8 (false), and x < –1 (true) are executed
first. NOT of (y >= 8) is executed next (true).
OR is executed last, and gives true (1).

MATLAB  has  built-in  functions  that  are  equivalent  to  the  logical  operators.
These functions are:

and(A,B)
or(A,B)
not(A)

equivalent to A&B
equivalent to A|B
equivalent to ~A

182

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

In addition, MATLAB has other logical built-in functions, some of which are
described in the following table:

Function

Description

xor(a,b)

Exclusive or. Returns true (1) if
one  operand  is  true  and  the
other is false.

all(A)

any(A)

Returns 1 (true) if all elements
in  a  vector  A  are  true  (non-
zero).  Returns  0  (false)  if  one
or  more  elements  are  false
(zero).
If A is a matrix, treats columns
of  A  as  vectors,  and  returns  a
vector with 1s and 0s.

Returns 1 (true) if any element
in a vector A is true (nonzero).
Returns 0 (false) if all elements
are false (zero).
If A is a matrix, treats columns
of  A  as  vectors,  and  returns  a
vector with 1s and 0s.

find(A)

find(A>d)

If A is a vector, returns the indi-
ces of the nonzero elements.

If  A  is  a  vector,  returns  the
address  of  the  elements  that
are  larger  than  d  (any  rela-
tional operator can be used).

Example

>> xor(7,0)
ans =
     1
>> xor(7,-5)
ans =
     0

>>  A=[6  2  15  9  7
11];
>> all(A)
ans =
     1
>>  B=[6  2  15  9  0
11];
>> all(B)
ans =
     0

>>  A=[6  0  15  0  0
11];
>> any(A)
ans =
     1
>>  B  =  [0  0  0  0  0
0];
>> any(B)
ans =
     0

>> A=[0 9 4 3 7 0 0
1 8];
>> find(A)
ans =
     2     3     4
5     8     9
>> find(A>4)
ans =
     2     5     9

6.1 Relational and Logical Operators

183

The operations of the four logical operators, and, or, xor, and not can be

summarized in a truth table:

INPUT

OUTPUT

A

B

false
false
true
true

false
true
false
true

AND
A&B
false
false
false
true

OR
A|B
false
true
true
true

XOR
(A,B)
false
true
true
false

NOT
~A

NOT
~B

true
true
false
false

true
false
true
false

Sample Problem 6-1: Analysis of temperature data

The  following  were  the  daily  maximum  temperatures  (in  °F)  in  Washington,
DC, during the month of April 2002:  58 73 73 53 50 48 56 73 73 66 69 63 74 82
84 91 93 89 91 80 59 69 56 64 63 66 64 74 63 69 (data from the U.S. National
Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration).  Use  relational  and  logical  opera-
tions to determine the following:
(a) The number of days the temperature was above 75°.
(b) The number of days the temperature was between 65° and 80°.
(c) The days of the month when the temperature was between 50° and 60°.

Solution

In the script file below the temperatures are entered in a vector. Relational and
logical expressions are then used to analyze the data.

T=[58 73 73 53 50 48 56 73 73 66 69 63 74 82 84 ...

   91 93 89 91 80 59 69 56 64 63 66 64 74 63 69];

Tabove75=T>=75;

A vector with 1s at addresses where T >= 75.

NdaysTabove75=sum(Tabove75)

Tbetween65and80=(T>=65)&(T<=80);

Add all the 1s in the vector Tabove75.
A vector with 1s at addresses
where T >= 65 and T <= 80.

NdaysTbetween65and80=sum(Tbetween65and80)

Add all the 1s in the vector Tbetween65and80.

datesTbetween50and60=find((T>=50)&(T<=60))

The function find returns the address of the ele-
ments in T that have values between 50 and 60.

