184

Chapter 6: Programming in MATLAB

The script file (saved as Exp6_1) is executed in the Command Window:

>> Exp6_1

NdaysTabove75 =
     7

NdaysTbetween65and80 =
    12

For 7 days the temp was above 75.

For 12 days the temp was between 65 and 80.

datesTbetween50and60 =
     1     4     5     7    21    23

Dates of the month with
temp between 50 and 60.

6.2 CONDITIONAL STATEMENTS

A conditional statement is a command that allows MATLAB to make a deci-
sion  of  whether  to  execute  a  group  of  commands  that  follow  the  conditional
statement, or to skip these commands. In a conditional statement, a conditional
expression is stated. If the expression is true, a group of commands that follow
the  statement  are  executed.  If  the  expression  is  false,  the  computer  skips  the
group. The basic form of a conditional statement is:

if conditional expression consisting of relational and/or logical operators.

Examples:

if a < b
if c >= 5
if a == b
if a ~= 0
if (d<h)&(x>7)
if (x~=13)|(y<0)

All  the  variables  must
have assigned values.

• Conditional statements can be a part of a program written in a script file or a

user-defined function (Chapter 7).

• As shown below, for every if statement there is an end statement.

The  if  statement  is  commonly  used  in  three  structures,  if-end,  if-

else-end, and if-elseif-else-end, which are described next.

6.2.1 The if-end Structure

The  if-end conditional statement  is shown  schematically in Figure 6-1.  The
figure shows how the commands are typed in the program, and a flowchart that
symbolically shows the flow, or the sequence, in which the commands are exe-
cuted. As the program executes, it reaches the if statement. If the conditional
expression in the if statement is true (1), the program continues to execute the

6.2 Conditional Statements

185

Flowchart

False

if
statement

True

Commands

end

MATLAB program.

......
......
......
if conditional expression

........
........
........

A group of
MATLAB commands.

end
......
......
......

MATLAB program.

Figure 6-1: The structure of the if-end conditional statement.

commands that follow the if statement all the way down to the end statement.
If the conditional expression is false (0), the program skips the group of com-
mands between the if and the end, and continues with the commands that fol-
low the end.

The  words  if  and  end  appear  on  the  screen  in  blue,  and  the  commands
between  the  if  statement  and  the  end  statement  are  automatically  indented
(they don’t have to be), which makes  the  program easier to read.  An  example
where the if-end statement is used in a script file is shown in Sample Problem
6-2.

Sample Problem 6-2: Calculating worker’s pay

A worker is paid according to his hourly wage up to 40 hours, and 50% more for
overtime. Write a program in a script file that calculates the pay to a worker. The
program asks the user to enter the number of hours and the hourly wage. The
program then displays the pay.

Solution

The program in a script file is shown below. The program first calculates the pay
by multiplying the number of hours by the hourly wage. Then an if statement
checks whether the number of hours is greater than 40. If so, the next line is exe-
cuted  and  the  extra  pay  for  the  hours  above  40  is  added.  If  not,  the  program
skips to the end.

t=input('Please enter the number of hours worked  ');

h=input('Please enter the hourly wage in $  ');

Pay=t*h;

if t>40

