224

Chapter 7: User-Defined Functions and Function Files

The various parts of the function file are described in detail in the following sec-
tions.

7.2.1 Function Definition Line

The first executable line in a function file must be the function definition line.
Otherwise the file is considered a script file. The function definition line:

• Defines the file as a function file

• Defines the name of the function

• Defines the number and order of the input and output arguments

The form of the function definition line is:

function [output arguments] = function_name(input arguments)

The word “function”
must be the first word,
and must be typed in
lowercase letters.

A list of output
arguments typed
inside brackets.

The name of
the function.

A list of input
arguments typed
inside parentheses.

The  word  “function,”  typed in  lowercase  letters,  must  be  the  first  word  in
the  function  definition  line.  On  the  screen  the  word  function  appears  in  blue.
The function name is typed following the equal sign. The name can be made up
of  letters,  digits,  and  the  underscore  character  (the  name  cannot  include  a
space).  The  rules  for  the  name  are  the  same  as  the  rules  for  naming  variables
described in Section 1.6.2. It is good practice to avoid names of built-in func-
tions and names of variables already defined by the user or predefined by MAT-
LAB.

7.2.2 Input and Output Arguments

The input and output arguments are used to transfer data into and out of the
function. The input arguments are listed inside parentheses following the func-
tion name. Usually, there is at least one input argument, although it is possible
to have a function that has no input arguments. If there are more than one, the
input arguments are separated with commas. The computer code that performs
the  calculations  within  the  function  file  is  written  in  terms  of  the  input  argu-
ments  and  assumes  that  the  arguments  have  assigned  numerical  values.  This
means  that  the  mathematical  expressions  in  the  function  file  must  be  written
according to the dimensions of the arguments, since the arguments can be sca-
lars, vectors, or arrays. In the example shown in Figure 7-2 there are three input
arguments (amount,rate,years), and in the mathematical expressions they
are assumed to be scalars. The actual values of the input arguments are assigned

