7.4 Saving a Function File

227

function  file  is  executed,  MATLAB  uses  an  area  of  memory  that  is  separate
from the workspace (the memory space of the Command Window and the script
files).  In  a  function  file  the  input  variables  are  assigned  values  each  time  the
function is called. These variables are then used in the calculations within the
function file. When the function file finishes its execution, the values of the out-
put arguments are transferred to the variables that were used when the function
was called. All this means that a function file can have variables with the same
names as variables in the Command Window or in script files. The function file
does not recognize variables with the same names as have been assigned values
outside the function. The assignment of values to these variables in the function
file will not change their assignment elsewhere.

Each  function  file  has  its  own  local  variables,  which  are  not  shared  with
other functions or with the workspace of the Command Window and the script
files. It is possible, however, to make a variable common (recognized) in several
different  function  files,  and  perhaps  in  the  workspace  too.  This  is  done  by
declaring the variable global with the global command, which has the form:

global variable_name

Several variables can be declared global by listing them, separated with spaces,
in the global command. For example:

global GRAVITY_CONST FrictionCoefficient

• The variable has to be declared global in every function file that the user wants it

to be recognized in. The variable is then common only to these files.

• The  global  command  must  appear  before  the  variable  is  used.  It  is  recom-

mended to enter the global command at the top of the file.

• The  global  command  has  to  be  entered  in  the  Command  Window,  or  in  a

script file, for the variable to be recognized in the workspace.

• The variable can be assigned, or reassigned, a value in any of the locations in

which it is declared common.

• The  use  of  long  descriptive  names  (or  all  capital  letters)  is  recommended  for

global variables in order to distinguish them from regular variables.

7.4 SAVING A FUNCTION FILE

A function file must be saved before it can be used. This is done, as with a script
file, by choosing Save as . . . from the File menu, selecting a location (many stu-
dents save to a flash drive), and entering the file name. It is highly recommended
that the file be saved with a name that is identical to the function name in the
function  definition  line.  In  this  way  the  function  is  called  (used)  by  using  the
function name. (If a function file is saved with a different name, the name it is
saved under must be used when the function is called.) Function files are saved

