228

Chapter 7: User-Defined Functions and Function Files

with the extension .m. Examples:

Function definition line

File name

function [mpay,tpay] = loan(amount,rate,years)

loan.m

function [A] = RectArea(a,b)

RectArea.m

function [V, S] = SphereVolArea(r)

SphereVolArea.m

function trajectory(v,h,g)

trajectory.m

7.5 USING A USER-DEFINED FUNCTION

A user-defined function is used in the same way as a built-in function. The func-
tion  can  be  called  from  the  Command  Window,  from  a  script  file,  or  from
another function. To use the function file, the folder where it is saved must either
be in the current folder or be in the search path (see Sections 1.8.3 and 1.8.4).

A function can be used by assigning its output to a variable (or variables), as
a part of a mathematical expression, as an argument in another function, or just
by typing its name in the Command Window or in a script file. In all cases the
user  must  know  exactly  what  the  input  and  output  arguments  are.  An  input
argument can be a number, a computable expression, or a variable that has an
assigned  value.  The  arguments  are  assigned  according  to  their  position  in  the
input and output argument lists in the function definition line.

Two of the ways that a function can be used are illustrated below with the
user-defined  loan  function  in  Figure  7-2,  which  calculates  the  monthly  and
total payments (two output arguments) of a loan. The input arguments are the
loan amount, annual interest rate, and the length (number of years) of the loan.
In the first illustration the loan function is used with numbers as input argu-
ments:

>> [month total]=loan(25000,7.5,4)

First argument is loan amount, second is
interest rate, and third is number of years.

month =
        600.72
total =
      28834.47

In the second illustration the loan function is used with two pre-assigned

variables and a number as the input arguments:

>> a=70000;  b=6.5;

>> [x y]=loan(a,b,30)

Define variables a and b.

Use a, b, and the number 30 for input
arguments and x (monthly pay) and y
(total pay) for output arguments.

