7.7 Comparison between Script Files and Function Files

231

7.7 COMPARISON BETWEEN SCRIPT FILES AND FUNCTION FILES

Students who are studying MATLAB for the first time sometimes have difficulty
understanding exactly the differences between script and function files, since for
many of the problems that they are asked to solve using MATLAB, either type
of file can be used. The similarities and differences between script and function
files are summarized below.

• Both script and function files are saved with the extension .m (that is why they

are sometimes called M-files).

• The first executable line in a function file is (must be) the function definition line.

• The variables in a function file are local. The variables in a script file are recog-

nized in the Command Window.

• Script files can use variables that have been defined in the workspace.

• Script files contain a sequence of MATLAB commands (statements).

• Function  files  can  accept  data  through  input  arguments  and  can  return  data

through output arguments.

• When  a  function  file  is  saved,  the  name  of  the  file  should  be  the  same  as  the

name of the function.

• A user-defined function is used in the same way as a built-in function. It can be
used (called) in the Command Window, in a script file, or in another function.

7.8 ANONYMOUS FUNCTIONS

User-defined functions written in function files can  be used for simple mathe-
matical functions, for large and complicated math functions that require exten-
sive  programming,  and  as  subprograms  in  large  computer  programs.  In  cases
when the value of a relatively simple mathematical expression has to be calcu-
lated  many  times  within  a  program,  MATLAB  provides  the  option  of  using
anonymous functions. An anonymous function is a user-defined function that is
defined and written within the computer code (not in a separate function file)
and is then used in the code. Anonymous functions can be defined in any part of
MATLAB  (in  the  Command  Window,  in  script  files,  and  inside  regular  user-
defined functions).

An anonymous function is a simple (one-line) user-defined function that is
defined without creating a separate function file (m-file). Anonymous functions
can be constructed in the Command Window, within a script file, or inside a reg-
ular user-defined function.

