266

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

>> [a b]=deconv(u,v)

a =
     2     3    -2

b =
     0     0     0     0

The answer is:

.

Remainder is zero.

An  example  of  division  that  gives  a  remainder  is

divided by

:

>> w=[2 -13 0 75 2 0 -60];

>> z=[1 0 -5];

>> [g h]=deconv(w,z)

g =
    2  -13   10   10   52

The quotient is:

h =
    0   0   0   0   0   50   200

The remainder is:

.

.

The answer is:

.

8.1.4 Derivatives of Polynomials

The built-in function polyder can be used to calculate the derivative of a sin-
gle polynomial, a product of two polynomials, or a quotient of two polynomials,
as shown in the following three commands.

k = polyder(p)

k = polyder(a,b)

Derivative  of  a  single  polynomial.  p  is  a  vector  with
the coefficients of the polynomial. k is a vector with
the  coefficients  of  the  polynomial  that  is  the  deriva-
tive.

Derivative of a product of two polynomials. a and b
are  vectors  with  the  coefficients  of  the  polynomials
that are multiplied. k is a vector with the coefficients
of the polynomial that is the derivative of the product.

[n d]= polyder(u,v) Derivative of a quotient of two polynomials. u and v
are vectors with the coefficients of the numerator and
denominator polynomials. n and d are  vectors  with
the  coefficients  of  the  numerator  and  denominator
polynomials in the quotient that is the derivative.

The  only  difference  between  the  last  two  commands  is  the  number  of  output
arguments. With two output arguments MATLAB calculates the derivative of
the quotient of two polynomials. With one output argument, the derivative is of
the product.

