8.5 Examples of MATLAB Applications

281

8.5 EXAMPLES OF MATLAB APPLICATIONS

Sample Problem 8-4: Determining wall thickness of a box

The  outside  dimensions  of  a  rectangular
box (bottom and four sides, no top), made
of aluminum, are 24 by 12 by 4 inches. The
wall thickness of the bottom and the sides
is x. Derive an expression that relates the
weight of the box and the wall thickness x.
Determine  the  thickness  x  for  a  box  that
weighs 15 lb. The specific weight of alumi-
num is 0.101 lb/in.3.

Solution

The volume of the aluminum VAl is calculated from the weight W of the box by:

where   is the specific weight. The volume of the aluminum based on the dimen-
sions of the box is given by

where the inside volume of the box is subtracted from the outside volume. This
equation can be rewritten as

which  is  a  third-degree  polynomial.  A  root  of  this  polynomial  is  the  required
thickness x. A program in a script file that determines the polynomial and solves
for the roots is:

W=15; gamma=0.101;

VAlum=W/gamma;

a=[-2  24];

b=[-2  12];

c=[-1  4];

Vin=conv(c, conv(a,b));

polyeq=[0 0 0 (VAlum-24*12*4)]+Vin

x=roots(polyeq)

Assign W and gamma.

Calculate the volume of the aluminum.
Assign the polynomial 24 – 2x to a.
Assign the polynomial 12 – 2x to b.

Assign the polynomial 4 – x to c.

Multiply the three polynomials above.
Add VAl – 24*12*4 to Vin.
Determine the roots of the polynomial.

Note in the second-to-last line that in order to add the quantity
to the polynomial Vin it has to be written as a polynomial of the same order as
Vin  (Vin  is  a  polynomial  of  third  order).  When  the  program  (saved  as
Chap8SamPro4) is executed, the coefficients of the polynomial and the value of
x are displayed:

282

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

>> Chap8SamPro4

polyeq =
 -4.0000  88.0000 -576.0000  148.5149

The polynomial is:

.

x =
  10.8656 + 4.4831i
  10.8656 - 4.4831i
  0.2687

The polynomial has one real root, x = 0.2687
in., which is the thickness of the aluminum

Sample Problem 8-5: Floating height of a buoy

An aluminum thin-walled sphere is used as a
marker  buoy.  The  sphere  has  a  radius  of  60
cm and a wall thickness of 12 mm. The den-
  kg/m3.  The
sity  of  aluminum  is
Al
buoy is placed in the ocean, where the density
of  the  water  is  1030  kg/m3.  Determine  the
height h between the top of the buoy and the
surface of the water.

2690

=

Solution

According to Archimedes’s law, the buoyancy
force applied to an object that is placed in a fluid is equal to the weight of the
fluid that is displaced by the object. Accordingly, the aluminum sphere will be at
a depth such that the weight of the sphere is equal to the weight of the fluid dis-
placed by the part of the sphere that is submerged.

The weight of the sphere is given by

VAl

where
radii of the sphere, respectively; and g is the gravitational acceleration.

 is the volume of the aluminum;

 and

 are the outside and inside

ro

ri

The weight of the water that is displaced by the spherical portion that is sub-

merged is given by:

Setting the two weights equal to each other gives the following equation:

The last equation is a third-degree polynomial for h. The root of the polynomial
is the answer.

A solution with MATLAB is obtained by writing the polynomials and using
the  roots  function  to  determine  the  value  of  h.This  is  done  in  the  following
script file:

8.5 Examples of MATLAB Applications

283

rout=0.60; rin=0.588;

rhoalum=2690; rhowtr=1030;

a0=4*rout^3-4*rhoalum*(rout^3-rin^3)/rhowtr;

Assign the radii to variables.
Assign the densities to variables.
Assign the coefficient a0.
Assign the coefficient vector of the polynomial.
Calculate the roots of the polynomial.

p = [1 -3*rout 0 a0];

h = roots(p)

When the script file is executed in the Command Window, as shown below, the
answer  is  three  roots,  since  the  polynomial  is  of  the  third  degree.  The  only
answer that is physically possible is the second, where h = 0.9029 m.

>> Chap8SamPro5

h =
    1.4542
    0.9029
   -0.5570

The polynomial has three roots. The only one that
is physically possible for the problem is 0.9029 m.

Sample Problem 8-6: Determining the size of a capacitor

An  electrical  capacitor  has  an  unknown
its
capacitance.  In  order  to  determine
capacitance,  the  capacitor  is  connected  to
the  circuit  shown.  The  switch  is  first  con-
nected  to  B  and  the  capacitor  is  charged.
Then, the switch is connected to A and the
capacitor  discharges  through  the  resistor.
As the capacitor is discharging, the voltage across the capacitor is measured for
10 s in intervals of 1 s. The recorded measurements are given in the table below.
Plot  the  voltage  as  a  function  of  time  and  determine  the  capacitance  of  the
capacitor by fitting an exponential curve to the data points.

t (s)

V (V)

1

9.4

Solution

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

7.31

5.15

3.55

2.81

2.04

1.26

0.97

0.74

0.58

When a capacitor discharges through a resistor, the voltage of the capacitor as a
function of time is given by

V0

where
 is the initial voltage, R the resistance of the resistor, and C the capaci-
tance of the capacitor. As was explained in Section 8.2.2 the exponential func-
tion can be written as a linear equation for ln(V) and t in the form:

284

Chapter 8: Polynomials, Curve Fitting, and Interpolation

, can be fitted to the data points
This equation, which has the form
by using the polyfit(x,y,1) function with t as the independent variable x
and ln(V) as the dependent variable y. The coefficients m and b determined by
the polyfit function are then used to determine C and

 by:

b+

mx

=

y

V0

  and

V0

eb=

The following program written in a script file determines the best-fit exponential
, and plots the points and the
function to the data points, determines C and
fitted function.

V0

R=2000;

t=1:10;

Define R.
Assign the data points to vectors t and v.

v=[9.4 7.31 5.15 3.55 2.81 2.04 1.26 0.97 0.74 0.58];

p=polyfit(t,log(v),1);

C=-1/(R*p(1))

V0=exp(p(2))

tplot=0:0.1:10;

Use the polyfit function with t and log(v).
Calculate C from p(1), which is m in the equation.
Calculate V0 from p(2), which is b in the equation.
Create vector tplot of time for plotting the function.

vplot=V0*exp(-tplot./(R*C));

Create vector vplot for plotting the function.

plot(t,v,'o',tplot,vplot)

When the script file is executed (saved as Chap8SamPro6) the values of C and
V0

 are displayed in the Command Window as shown below:

>> Chap8SamPro6

C =
    0.0016

V0 =
   13.2796

The capacitance of the capacitor is 1,600  F.

The program creates also the following plot (axis labels were added to the plot
using the Plot Editor):

)

V

(

V

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

t (s)

8.5 Examples of MATLAB Applications

285

Sample Problem 8-7: Temperature dependence of viscosity

Viscosity,
, is a property of gases and fluids that characterizes their resistance
to flow. For most materials, viscosity is highly sensitive to temperature. Below is
a table that gives the viscosity of SAE 10W oil at different temperatures (data
from  B.R.  Munson,  D.F.  Young,  and  T.H.  Okiishi,  Fundamentals  of  Fluid
Mechanics,  4th  ed.,  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  2002).  Determine  an  equation  that
can be fitted to the data.

T   (°C)

–20

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

 (N s/m2)

(

)

Solution

4

0.38

0.095

0.032

0.015

0.007
8

0.004
5

0.003
2

)

(

100

101

2
m
/
s
*
N

To determine what type of equation
might provide a good fit to the data,
 is plotted as a function of T (abso-
lute temperature) with a linear scale
for  T  and  a  logarithmic  scale  for
.
The  plot,  shown  on  the  right,  indi-
cates  that  the  data  points  do  not
appear  to  line  up  along  a  straight
line. This means that a simple expo-
form
nential
function  of
,  which  models  a  straight
y
=
line with these axes, will not provide
the  best  fit.  Since  the  points  in  the  figure  appear  to  lie  along  a  curved  line,  a
function that can possibly have a good fit to the data is:

Temperature (K)

bemx

the

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
V

10-1

10-2

10-3

350

250

300

400

i

=

ln

a2T2
This function can be fitted to the data by using MATLAB’s polyfit(x,y,2)
function (second-degree polynomial), where the independent variable is  T and
the dependent variable is ln( ). The equation above can be solved for
 to give
the viscosity as a function of temperature:

a1T a0
+

+

a2T2

+

a1T a0
+

a1T

a0e

e

e

=

a2T2

=

e

The following program determines the best fit to the function and creates a plot
that displays the data points and the function.

T=[-20:20:120];

mu=[4 0.38 0.095 0.032 0.015 0.0078 0.0045 0.0032];

TK=T+273;

p=polyfit(TK,log(mu),2)

