Chapter 9
Applications in
Numerical Analysis

Numerical methods are commonly used for solving mathematical problems that
are formulated in science and engineering where it is difficult or impossible to
obtain  exact  solutions.  MATLAB  has  a  large  library  of  functions  for  numeri-
cally solving a wide variety of mathematical problems. This chapter explains a
number of the most frequently used of these functions. It should be pointed out
here that the purpose of this book is to show users how to use MATLAB. Some
general  information  on the  numerical  methods  is given,  but  the  details, which
can be found in books on numerical analysis, are not included.

The following topics are presented in this chapter: solving an equation with
one unknown, finding a minimum or a maximum of a function, numerical inte-
gration, and solving a first-order ordinary differential equation.

9.1 SOLVING AN EQUATION WITH ONE VARIABLE

f x

0=

An equation with one variable can be written in the form
. A solution
to  the  equation  (also  called  a  root)  is  a  numerical  value  of  x  that  satisfies  the
equation. Graphically, a solution is a point where the function
 crosses or
touches the x axis. An exact solution is a value of x for which the value of the
function is exactly zero. If such a value does not exist or is difficult to determine,
a numerical solution can be determined by finding an x that is very close to the
solution. This is done by the iterative process, where in each iteration the com-
puter determines a value of x that is closer to the solution. The iterations stop
when the difference in x between two iterations is smaller than some measure. In
general,  a  function  can  have  zero,  one,  several,  or  an  infinite  number  of  solu-
tions.

f x

296

Chapter 9: Applications in Numerical Analysis

  In  MATLAB  a  zero  of  a  function  can  be  determined  with the  command

(built-in function) fzero with the form:

x = fzero(function,x0)

Solution

The function
to be solved.

A value of x close to where
the function crosses the axis.

The built-in function fzero is a MATLAB function function (see Section 7.9),
which means that it accepts another function (the function to be solved) as an
input argument.

Additional details on the arguments of fzero:

• x is the solution, which is a scalar.

• function  is  the  function  to  be  solved.  It  can  be  entered  in  several  different

ways:
1. The simplest way is to enter the mathematical expression as a string.
2. The function is created as a user-defined function in a function file and
       then the function handle is entered (see Section 7.9.1).
3. The function is created as an anonymous function (see Section 7.8.1)
       and then the name of the anonymous function (which is the name of the
       handle) is entered (see Section 7.9.1).

(As explained in Section 7.9.2, it is also possible to pass a user-defined function
and  an  inline  function  into  a  function  function  by  using  its  name.  However,
function handles are more efficient and easier to use, and should be the preferred
method.)

• The function has to be written in a standard form. For example, if the function
to be solved is
. If this
, it has to be written as
function  is  entered  into  the  fzero  command  as  a  string,  it  is  typed  as:
‘x*exp(-x)-0.2’.

• When  a  function  is  entered  as  an  expression  (string),  it  cannot  include  pre-
,

defined variables. For example, if the function to be entered is
it is not possible to define b=0.2 and then enter ‘x*exp(-x)-b’.

• x0  can be a scalar or a two-element vector. If it is entered as a scalar, it has to be
a value of x near the point where the function crosses (or touches) the x axis. If
x0 is entered as a vector, the two elements have to be points on opposite sides of
the solution. If
 has a different sign than
. When a function has more than one solution, each solution can be
f x0 2
determined separately by using the fzero function and entering values for x0
that are near each of the solutions.

 crosses the x axis, then

f x0 1

f x

9.1 Solving an Equation with One Variable

297

• A good way to find approximately where a function has a solution is to make a
plot of the function. In many applications in science and engineering the domain
of the solution can be estimated. Often when a function has more than one solu-
tion only one of the solutions will have a physical meaning.

Sample Problem 9-1: Solving a nonlinear equation

Determine the solution of the equation

Solution

The equation is first written in the form of a
.  A  plot  of  the
function:
function,  shown  on  the  right,  shows  that  the
function  has  one  solution  between  0  and  1
and  another  solution  between  2  and  3.  The
plot is obtained by typing

>> fplot('x*exp(-x)-0.2',[0 8])

.

0.2

0.1

y

0

-0.1

-0.2
0

1

2

3

4
x

5

6

7

8

in the Command Window. The solutions of the function are found by using the
fzero command twice. First the equation is entered as a string expression, and
a  value  of  x0  between  0  and  1  (x0  =  0.7)  is  used.  Second,  the  equation  to  be
solved is written as an anonymous function, which is then used in fzero with
x0 between 2 and 3 (x0 = 2.8). This is shown below:

>> x1=fzero('x*exp(-x)-0.2',0.7)

x1 =
    0.2592

>> F=@(x)x*exp(-x)-0.2
F =
    @(x)x*exp(-x)-0.2

The  function  is  entered  as
a string expression.

The first solution is 0.2592.

Creating an anonymous function.

>> fzero(F,2.8)
ans =
    2.5426

Additional comments:

Using the name of the anonymous function in fzero.

The second solution is 2.5426.

• The fzero command finds zeros of a function only where the function crosses
the  x  axis.  The  command  does  not  find  a  zero  at  points  where  the  function
touches but does not cross the x axis.

•

If a solution cannot be determined, NaN is assigned to x.

• The fzero command has additional options (see the Help Window). Two of

the more important options are:

